# CLUTCH SYSTEM

## Adjusting Clutch Play and Cable for 1993 Volvo 940


1. Clutch play is adjusted under the vehicle at the clutch fork.

2. Loosen the locknut on the fork side of the cable bracket and turn the adjust
   nut until the proper play is achieved.

3. Tighten the locknut.

4. Clutch play for all engines except turbocharged is 0.12–0.20 in. (3–5mm).
   Turbocharged engine clutch play (free movement rearward) is 0.04–0.12 in.
   (1–3mm).


NOTE: Vehicles equipped with hydraulic clutch assemblies are not adjustable.

Fig. 1: Checking the clutch negative play

Fig. 2: Adjust the clutch cable by turning the locknut

## Clutch Cable Removal and Installation Procedure


This procedure does not apply to hydraulic clutches.

1. Raise and support the vehicle safely.

2. Disconnect the clutch cable from the clutch fork. Some vehicles are equipped
   with a release bearing that rotates. These vehicles will have a clutch return
   spring at the pedal assembly.

3. Disconnect the cable at the pedal assembly.

4. Remove the cable. On some early vehicles, the clutch cable is fitted with a
   weight. Do not replace the weight when installing the new cable.

5. Install the cable in the vehicle.

6. Connect the clutch cable at the clutch fork and the pedal assembly.

7. Adjust the clutch cable.

To install:

## Clutch System Inspection and Maintenance


Check the pressure plate for heat damage, cracks, scoring, or other damage to
the friction surface. Check the curvature of the pressure plate with a steel
ruler.

Place the ruler diagonally over the pressure plate friction surface and measure
the distance between the straight edge of the ruler and the inner diameter of
the pressure plate. This measurement must not be greater than 0.008 inch
(0.2mm). In addition, there must be no clearance between the straight edge of
the ruler and the outer diameter of the pressure plate. This check should be
made at several points. Additionally, inspect the tips of the diaphragm springs
(fingers) for any sign of wear. Replace the clutch as a unit (disc, pressure
plate and throwout bearing) if any fault is found.

Check the throwout bearing by rotating it several times while applying finger
pressure, so that the ball bearings roll against the inside of the races. If the
bearing does not turn easily or if it binds at any point, replace it as a unit.
Also make sure that the bearing slides easily on the guide sleeve from the
transmission.

Inspect the clutch disc for signs of slippage (burns) or oil contamination. Make
sure the rivets are not loose and that the clutch contact surfaces are well
above the rivet heads. The thickness of the disc above the rivet heads is the
"remaining life" of the disc; always replace the disc if in doubt.  When
reassembling, apply grease to the splines and end shaft, the throwout bearing
and the pivot ball and seat of the clutch fork.


## Clutch Removal and Inspection Procedure for Rear Drive Models


Rear Drive Models

1. Remove the transmission.

2. Scribe alignment marks on the clutch and flywheel.

3. Slowly loosen the bolts holding the clutch to the flywheel in a diagonal
   pattern.

4. Remove the bolts and lift off the clutch and pressure plate.

5. Inspect the pressure plate for heat damage, cracks, scoring or any other
   damage.

6. Place a ruler diagonally over the pressure plate friction surface and measure
   the distance between the straightedge of the ruler and the inner diameter of
   the pressure plate. This measurement must not be greater than 0.008 inch
   (0.2mm). In addition, there must be no clearance between the straightedge and
   the outer diameter of the pressure plate. This check should be made at
   several points.

7. Clean the pressure plate and flywheel with solvent to remove any traces of
   oil and wipe them clean with a cloth.

8. Position the clutch assembly with the longest side of the hub facing away
   from the engine. Fit it to the flywheel and align the bolt holes.

9. Insert centering tool 5111 or equivalent or an input shaft from an old
   transmission of the same type, through the clutch assembly and flywheel. This
   centers the assembly and pilot bearing.

To install:

10. Install the clutch retaining bolts and tighten them in a diagonal pattern, a
    few turns at a time. After all the bolts are tightened, remove the centering
    tool.

11. Install the transmission.

Front Drive Models

1. Remove the transaxle.

2. Lock the flywheel in position.

3. Remove the six bolts retaining the pressure plate and disc, loosen them in
   rotation.

4. Remove the pressure plate and disc.

5. Remove the throwout bearing from the sleeve and fork.

6. Remove the fork and dust cap from the transaxle.

7. Clean and check the throwout bearing, It should rotate freely and quietly.

8. Clean and check the fork for cracks and wear and that the dust cap is intact.

9. Check the pressure plate carefully for signs of overheating, cracks, scoring
   or other damage to the friction surface. Make sure that the diaphragm spring
   is not split or damaged.  If any part of the pressure plate is damaged, it
   must be replaced.

10. Check the pressure plate for warpage by laying a straightedge across the
    contact surface and checking the distance with a feeler gauge. The maximum
    width is 0.008 in.  (0.2mm).

11. Check the flywheel for cracks and heavy scoring. If it is damaged it must be
    replaced.

12. Check the clutch disc for oil or dirt and clean if necessary.

13. Install the throwout bearing fork, and lubricate the ball joint with grease.

14. Install the throwout bearing and dust cap.

15. Secure the fork to the transaxle, so that it cannot be moved during
    installation.

16. Install the clutch disc and pressure plate using centering drift 999 5487 or
    equivalent clutch alignment tool.

17. Install the clutch bolts, tightening them in rotation so that the clutch
    slides over the locating pins and lies evenly against the flywheel. Then
    tighten the bolts to 18 ft. lbs. (25 Nm).  Remove the centering drift.

18. Install the transaxle and check the clutch operation.

NOTE: Warpage is permitted in one direction only.

To install:

NOTE: Do not apply any grease to the splines on the transaxle input shaft.

Fig. 1: Typical clutch alignment tool, note how the splines match the
transmission's input shaft

Fig. 2: Loosen and remove the clutch and pressure plate bolts evenly, a little
at a time . . .

Fig. 3: . . . then carefully removing the clutch and pressure plate assembly
from the flywheel

Fig. 4: Check across the flywheel surface, it should be flat

Fig. 5: If necessary, lock the flywheel in place and remove the retaining bolts
. . .

Fig. 6: . . . then remove the flywheel from the crankshaft in order replace it
or have it machined

Fig. 7: Upon installation, it is usually a good idea to apply a threadlocking
compound to the flywheel bolts

Fig. 8: Check the pressure plate for excessive wear

Fig. 9: Be sure that the flywheel surface is clean, before installing the clutch

Fig. 10: Install a clutch alignment arbor, to align the clutch assembly during
installation

Fig. 11: Clutch plate installed with the arbor in place

Fig. 12: Clutch plate and pressure plate installed with the alignment arbor in
place

Fig. 13: Pressure plate-to-flywheel bolt holes should align

Fig. 14: You may want to use a threadlocking compound on the clutch assembly
bolts

Fig. 15: Install the clutch assembly bolts and tighten in steps, using an X
pattern

Fig. 16: Be sure to use a torque wrench to tighten all bolts

## Brake Master Cylinder and Clutch System Integration


On some models, the brake master cylinder incorporates the clutch master
cylinder. For those models, refer to Brake Master Cylinder removal and
installation in Section 9.

## Clutch System Removal and Installation Procedure


1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Drain the clutch reservoir with a bulb syringe.

WARNING
Be careful not to drip brake fluid on any painted surfaces.

3. Remove the underdash panel and remove the lockring and pin from the clutch
   pedal.

4. Remove the hose from the master cylinder. Use a clean jar to collect
   spillage.

5. Unfasten the retaining bolts and remove the master cylinder.

To install:

NOTE: When reinstalling, make sure that the clearance (free-play) between the
pushrod and piston is 0.04 inch (1mm).


6. Install the master cylinder and tighten the retaining bolts.

7. Install the hose onto the master cylinder. Make certain the hose is correctly threaded and secure.

8. Install the pushrod onto the pedal.

9. Top up the fluid and bleed the system as explained later in this section.

10. Connect the negative battery cable.

Fig. 1: Exploded view of the hydraulic clutch system

## Hydraulic Clutch System Bleeding Procedure


The hydraulic clutch system should be bled any time the hoses have been loosened
or any component replaced. The bleeding process is quite simple and eliminates
any air which has become trapped within the lines. The clutch system may be
bleed using Tool 998 5876 or equivalent, or with the help of an assistant.

Add brake fluid to the reservoir. Attach a length of hose to the bleeder nipple
on the slave cylinder (at the transmission) and put the other end in a clear
glass jar. Put enough brake fluid in the jar to cover the end of the hose.

Have an assistant press the clutch pedal to the floor and open the bleed screw
on the slave cylinder. Close off the bleeder while the pedal is still depressed
and repeat the process with another application of the clutch pedal. As the
bleeder is released each time, observe the fluid in the jar. When no bubbles are
coming out of the hose, the system is bled. Secure the fitting, remove the hose
and jar, and top up the brake fluid to its proper level.

Fig. 1: If clutch pedal travel exceeds 170mm before
engaging the clutch, bleed the clutch

Fig. 2: Bleeding the clutch using tool 998 5876 or equivalent

## Clutch System Installation and Bleeding


1. Raise and support the front end on jackstands.

2. Disconnect the fluid line at the cylinder.

3. Unbolt the cylinder from the flywheel housing.

4. Install the cylinder and tighten the retaining bolts.

5. Connect the fluid line.

6. Lower the vehicle.

7. Bleed the clutch system.

To install:

