# ELECTRONIC ENGINE CONTROLS


## Acceleration Sensor Function and Location

There is no acceleration sensor on the Volvo 940


## Camshaft Position Sensor Operation and Function

Fig. 1: Camshaft sensor components and location — 960 models

The function of the Camshaft Position (CMP) sensor is to tell the ECM if the
camshaft is on the first or second revolution of an engine cycle. The CMP sensor
allows the engine to determine which pistons are approaching TDC. The CMP
sensor, in conjunction with the crankshaft position sensor, determine which
cylinder requires ignition.

The CMP sensor consists of a trigger rotor and a Hall effect switch. The trigger
rotor turns at the same speed as the camshaft. The ECM sends a 5-volt supply to
the Hall effect sensor, which is grounded when the rotor passes the Hall effect
switch, giving a zero voltage signal. When the sensor is shielded, the sensor
returns the 5-volt signal to the ECM.


## Replacing the Crankshaft Position Sensor

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Remove the air inlet hose from the air cleaner housing and the throttle body.

3. Unplug the sensor's connector.

4. Remove the two retaining screws and remove the sensor from the engine.

5. Install the sensor into place and tighten the retaining bolts.

To install:

6. Plug in the connector.

7. Install the air inlet hose onto the throttle body and the air cleaner
   housing.

8. Connect the negative battery cable.

Fig. 1: Crankshaft position sensor (1) and camshaft position sensor (2)

Fig. 2: Removing the CMP sensor

Fig. 3: Inspect the Hall effect switch inside the CMP sensor after removal


## Testing Voltage and Ground Circuits for CMP Sensor

Fig. 1: CMP sensor connector terminals

Fig. 2: Checking for battery voltage at terminal 3

Fig. 3: Checking the signal return circuit of the CMP sensor

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Unplug the sensor connector.

3. To test the voltage lead:

4. 

5.


    A.  Using an voltmeter, measure the voltage at terminal 3. Turn the ignition
    ON, and measure the voltage between terminal 3 and ground.


    B.  Voltage should be battery voltage. If voltage is not present or out of
    range, repair the circuit. If voltage is ok, proceed to the next step.

    To test the signal return:

    A.  Using an voltmeter, measure the voltage at terminal 2. Turn the ignition
    ON, and measure the voltage between terminal 2 and ground.


    B.  Voltage should be around 5v. If voltage is not present or out of range,
    repair the circuit. If voltage is ok, proceed to the next step.

    To test the ground circuit:

    A.  Using an ohmmeter, measure the resistance at terminal 1. Turn the
    ignition ON, and measure the resistance between terminal 1 and ground.


    B.  Resistance should be 0 ohms. If continuity is not present or out of
    range, repair the circuit. If continuity is ok, replace the CMP sensor.


## Pulsewheel and CKP Sensor Configuration

Fig. 1: The CKP sensor and pulse wheel

The Crankshaft Position (CKP) sensor, sometimes called an RPM and/or impulse
sensor, is used to determine engine speed and Top Dead Center (TDC). This
ensures precise ignition timing. The sensor is located at the rear of the engine
block, above the flywheel. Engine speed is transmitted to the fuel control unit.
The engine will not start without this signal.

### LH Jetronic and EZK Ignition System Vehicles

On the pulsewheel, there are 60 markings for the CKP sensor, 58 which are
drilled holes to provide information to the ignition control unit. There are no
holes at 2 of the markings. These are 90 degrees Before Top Dead Center (BTDC),
for cylinders No. 1 and No. 4. Ignition timing is based on these markings and
other information such as engine load and temperature. This means that ignition
timing can be controlled and that there is no need for the ignition setting to
be adjusted.


## Sensor Removal and Installation Procedure

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Remove any components necessary to access the sensor.

3. Unplug the sensor's connector.

4. Remove the two retaining screws and remove the sensor from the engine.

5. Install the sensor into place and tighten the retaining bolts.

To install:

6. Plug in the connector.

7. Install any components removed to access the sensor.

8. Connect the negative battery cable.


## Testing CKP Sensor Resistance and Replacement

Fig. 1: CKP sensor terminal identification

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Unplug the sensor connector.

3. Using an ohmmeter, measure the resistance across the two sensor terminals.

4. Resistance should be between 200–500 ohms. If the resistance is out of range,
   replace the sensor.

Fig. 2: Testing the CMP sensor resistance


## Engine Control Module (ECM) Functions and Fuel Management

The Engine Control Module (ECM) performs many functions on your vehicle. The
module accepts information from various engine sensors and computes the required
fuel flow rate necessary to maintain the correct amount of air/fuel ratio
throughout the entire engine operational range.

Based on the information that is received and programmed into the ECM's memory,
the ECM generates output signals to control relays, actuators and solenoids. The
ECM also sends out a command to the fuel injectors that meters the appropriate
quantity of fuel. The module automatically senses and compensates for any
changes in altitude when driving your vehicle.


## ECM Removal and Reinstallation Procedure

NOTE: If the battery cable(s) is disconnected for longer than 5 minutes, the
adaptive fuel factor will be lost. After repair it will be necessary to drive
the vehicle at least 10 miles, and as many as 250, to allow the processor to
relearn the correct factors. The driving period should include steady-throttle
open road driving if possible.

During the drive, the vehicle may exhibit driveability symptoms not noticed
before. These symptoms should clear as the control module computes the
correction factor.

### Coupe, 240, 700 and 940 Series

Fig. 1: Location of the ECM on Coupe, 240, 700 and 940 series models. Be sure to
lift the retaining clip before detaching the connector

NOTE: The ECM is located on the passenger side footwell under the kickpanel.

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Remove the kickpanel to access the ECM.

3. Remove the retaining bolts on the ECM bracket.

4. Carefully lower the ECM and unlatch the harness connector from the ECM.

5. Remove the ECM.

6. Attach the connector to the ECM and carefully place it into position.

7. Tighten the bracket retaining bolts.

8. Install the kickpanel.

9. Connect the negative battery cable.

To install:

10. Start the vehicle and check to make sure the "check engine" light on the
    instrument cluster is operative.


## Engine Coolant Temperature Sensor and its Role in Electronic Engine Controls

Fig. 1: Location of the ECT sensor — 850/C70/S70/V70 models

The Engine Coolant Temperature (ECT) sensor resistance changes in response to
engine coolant temperature. The sensor resistance decreases as the coolant
temperature increases, and increases as the coolant temperature decreases. This
provides a reference signal to the ECM, which indicates engine coolant
temperature. The signal sent to the ECM by the ECT sensor helps the ECM to
determine spark advance, EGR flow rate, air/fuel ratio, and engine temperature.
The ECT also is used for temperature gauge operation by sending it's signal to
the instrument cluster.


## Replacing the Engine Coolant Sensor

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

CAUTION Never open, service or drain the radiator or cooling system when hot;
serious burns can occur from the steam and hot coolant. Also, when draining
engine coolant, keep in mind that cats and dogs are attracted to ethylene glycol
antifreeze and could drink any that is left in an uncovered container or in
puddles on the ground. This will prove fatal in sufficient quantities. Always
drain coolant into a sealable container. Coolant should be reused unless it is
contaminated or is several years old.

2. Drain and recycle the engine coolant.

3. Remove any components necessary to access the sensor.

4. Remove the connector from the sensor.

5. Using the proper size socket, unscrew the sensor from its mounting location.

6. Install the sensor in its mounting location and tighten it.

7. Install the connector on the sensor.

8. Install any components removed to access the sensor.

9. Refill and bleed the engine cooling system.

To install:

10. Connect the negative battery cable.

11. Inspect for leaks.


## Testing and Replacement of Engine Coolant Temperature (ECT) Sensor

1. Turn the key to the ON position, with the engine OFF.

2. Test the resistance of the sensor across the two terminals of the sensor.

3. Using the chart in this section for a cross reference, check the resistance
   in relationship to the temperature of the engine.

4. If the sensor is not within specifications, replace it.

Fig. 1: ECT sensor terminal identification

Fig. 2: Unplug the connector from the ECT sensor to test the sensor

Fig. 3: Use an ohmmeter and check the sensor's resistance based on the
temperature of the engine

Fig. 4: Engine temperature-to-resistance conversion chart


## Oxygen Sensor Function and Operation

The Oxygen Sensor (O2S) is a device which produces an electrical voltage when
exposed to the oxygen present in the exhaust gases. The sensor is mounted in the
exhaust manifold.

Some oxygen sensors are electrically heated internally for faster switching when
the engine is running. The oxygen sensor produces a voltage within 0 and 1 volt.
When there is a large amount of oxygen present (lean mixture), the sensor
produces a low voltage (less than 0.4v). When there is a lesser amount present
(rich mixture) it produces a higher voltage (0.6 –1.0v).The stoichiometric or
correct fuel to air ratio will read between 0.4 and 0.6v. By monitoring the
oxygen content and converting it to electrical voltage, the sensor acts as a
rich-lean switch. The voltage is transmitted to the engine controller. The
controller signals the power module to trigger the fuel injector.

Later models have two sensors, one before the catalytic converter and one after.
This is done for a catalyst efficiency monitor that is a part of the OBD-II
engine controls that are on these year vehicles. The one before the catalyst
measures the exhaust emissions right out of the engine, and sends the signal to
the ECM about the state of the mixture as previously talked about. The second
sensor reports the difference in the emissions after the exhaust gases have gone
through the catalyst. This sensor reports to the ECM the amount of emissions
reduction the catalyst is performing.

The oxygen sensor will not work until a predetermined temperature is reached,
until this time the engine controller is running in what as known as OPEN LOOP
operation. OPEN LOOP means that the engine controller has not yet begun to
correct the air-to-fuel ratio by reading the oxygen sensor. After the engine
comes to operating temperature, the engine controller will monitor the oxygen
sensor and correct the air/fuel ratio from the sensor's readings. This is what
is known as CLOSED LOOP operation.

A Heated Oxygen Sensor (HO2S) has a heating element that keeps the sensor at
proper operating temperature during all operating modes. Maintaining correct
sensor temperature at all times allows the system to enter into CLOSED LOOP
operation sooner.

In CLOSED LOOP operation, the engine controller monitors the sensor input (along
with other inputs) and adjusts the injector pulse width accordingly. During OPEN
LOOP operation, the engine controller ignores the sensor input and adjusts the
injector pulse to a preprogrammed value based on other inputs.

Fig. 1: OBD-II equipped vehicles have two HO2 sensors, one before and one after
the catalyst


## Oxygen Sensor Replacement Procedure

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Raise and support the vehicle safely.

3. Label and disconnect the HO2S from the engine control wiring harness.

4. Remove the sensor using an appropriate tool. Special oxygen sensor sockets
   are available to remove the sensor and can be purchased at many parts stores
   or where automotive tools are sold. The proper size wrench can be used, most
   sensors are 7 ⁄ 8 inch or 22mm sizes.

5. Before installing, apply "Never Seez" paste (P/N 1 161 035-9) or equivalent
   anti-seize compound to the threaded section of the sensor.

NOTE: Lubricate the sensor with penetrating oil prior to removal.

To install:

6. Install the sensor in the mounting boss and tighten to 40 ft. lbs. (55 Nm).

7. Connect the engine control wiring harness to the sensor.

8. Lower the vehicle.

9. Connect the negative battery cable.

10. Remove the oxygen sensor, using a suitable wrench.

Fig. 1: Location of the front HO2S on an OBD-II equipped 850 model

Fig. 2: The catalyst efficiency monitor HO2S is located under this shield on 850
models

Fig. 3: The sensor can be seen from the side, but the panel must first be
removed if the sensor is to be removed

Fig. 4: Unplug the HO2S connectors

Fig. 5: Remove the clip retaining the harness for the HO2S

Fig. 6: The rear HO2S has an additional clip retaining the harness

Fig. 7: A proper size open end wrench can be used to remove the HO2S

Fig. 8: Remove the HO2S from the exhaust pipe

Fig. 9: Inspect the oxygen sensor tip for abnormal deposits


## Checking Power and Ground Circuits for HO2S Heating Element

WARNING Do not pierce the wires when testing this sensor; this can lead to
wiring harness damage. Backprobe the connector to properly read the voltage of
the HO2S.

1. Disconnect the HO2S.

2. Check for supply voltage to the heating element by checking the power and
   ground circuits using the wiring diagrams located in Section 6. Check the
   heating element by:

3. 


    A.  Turn the ignition to RUN position, with the engine OFF.


    B.  Using a DVOM, probe the proper circuits connecting the positive lead of
    the DVOM to the power circuit and the negative lead to the ground circuit.


    C.  Battery voltage should be present, if voltage is present but less than 8
    volts, perform the following step. If there is no voltage skip the next
    step.


    D.  Remove the connector on the ECM and check the resistance of the HO2S
    heater's power and ground circuits, if more than 5 ohms, repair the
    circuit(s). If resistance is less than 5 ohms, replace the ECM.


    E.  If no voltage is present check for continuity of the HO2S heater's power
    and ground circuits. If continuity is present and resistance is less than 5
    ohms, replace the ECM, if the circuit is open or resistance exceeds 5 ohms
    repair the circuit(s).

Start the vehicle and let it reach operating temperature. With the HO2S
connected and engine running, measure the voltage with a Digital Volt-Ohmmeter
(DVOM) between terminals HO2S and SIG RTN (GND) of the oxygen sensor connector.
Voltage should fluctuate between 0.01–1.1 volts. If voltage fluctuation is slow
or voltage is not within specification, the sensor may be faulty.

Fig. 1: Location of the HO2S connector — 700 series

Fig. 2: Location of the HO2S connector — 240 series


## Idle Air Control Valve and Function

Fig. 1: A typical IAC valve assembly

An Idle Air Control (IAC) valve is incorporated into the system to set the
correct air valve opening and constant idle speed. The valve consists of a
stepper motor with twin coils, one for opening and one for closing. The ECM
delivers pulsed ground signals to both IAC coils. Depending on the signals from
the ECM, the motor operates a rotary valve which controls the air flow through
the outlet port.

In the event of an electrical fault, a spring maintains the rotary valve in a
fixed position and the idling speed is increased to approximately 1200 RPM. The
ECM incorporates a self-learning system which enables it to learn the ideal
idling speed. Because of this feature, the IAC valve is not adjustable.


## IAC Valve Removal and Installation Process

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Remove the throttle pulley cover (if equipped).

3. Remove the connector from the IAC.

4. Remove the hoses from the IAC valve.

5. Remove the IAC valve from the mounting hardware.

6. Place the IAC valve in the mounting hardware and secure it.

7. Install the hoses to the IAC.

8. Install the connector on the IAC.

9. Install the throttle pulley cover (if removed).

To install:

10. Connect the negative battery cable.  Fig. 1: Location of the IAC valve — 850
    models


## Testing Coil Driver Circuits and Voltage Lead in IAC Valve

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Unplug the IAC connector.

3. To test the coil driver circuits in the IAC valve:

4. 5.

6. 


    A.  Using an ohmmeter, measure the resistance between pins 3 and 2 on the
    IAC valve.


    B.  Resistance should be 10–14 ohms. If resistance is ok, proceed to the
    next step. If resistance is out of range, replace the IAC and retest.


    C.  Using an ohmmeter, measure the resistance between pins 1 and 2 on the
    IAC valve.


    D.  Resistance should be 10–14 ohms. If resistance is ok, proceed to the
    next step. If resistance is out of range, replace the IAC and retest.

To test the voltage lead:

    A.  Using an voltmeter, measure the voltage at terminal 2. Turn the ignition
    ON, and measure the voltage between terminal 2 and ground.


    B.  Voltage should be battery voltage. If voltage is not present or out of
    range, repair the circuit. If voltage is ok, proceed to the next step.

To test the signal return:

    A.  Using an voltmeter, measure the voltage at terminal 1. Turn the ignition
    ON, and measure the voltage between terminal 1 and ground.


    B.  Voltage should be around 6.0–8.5v. If voltage is not present or out of
    range, repair the circuit. If voltage is ok, proceed to the next step.

To test the ground circuit:

    A.  Using an ohmmeter, measure the resistance at terminal 3. Turn the
    ignition ON, and measure the resistance between terminal 1 and ground.


    B.  Resistance should be 0 ohms. If continuity is not present or out of
    range, repair the circuit. If continuity is ok, replace the CMP sensor and
    retest.  Fig. 1: IAC valve terminal (pin) identification

Fig. 2: IAC valve connector terminal identification

Fig. 3: Testing the coil driver circuit between pins 2 and 3

Fig. 4: Testing the coil driver circuit between pins 2 and 1

Fig. 5: Testing the IAC valve circuit at terminal 2 of the harness connector


## Intake Air Temperature Sensor Operation and Function

The Intake Air Temperature (IAT) sensor determines the air temperature inside
the intake manifold. Resistance changes in response to the ambient air
temperature. The sensor has a negative temperature coefficient. As the
temperature of the sensor rises the resistance across the sensor decreases. This
provides a signal to the ECM indicating the temperature of the incoming air
charge. This sensor helps the ECM to determine spark timing and air/fuel ratio.
Information from this sensor is added to the pressure sensor information to
calculate the air mass being sent to the cylinders.

Fig. 1: Typical intake air temperature sensor


## Sensor Installation and Removal Procedure

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Unplug the connector from the sensor.

3. The sensor is removed by carefully twisting it out of the intake hose.

4. Twist the sensor into the intake hose.

5. Plug in the connector.

6. Connect the negative battery cable.

To install:


## IAT Sensor Voltage Testing and Replacement

1. Turn the key to the ON position, with the engine OFF.

2. Test the voltage of the sensor across the two terminals of the sensor.

3. Using the chart in this section for a cross reference, check the voltage in
   relationship to the temperature of the engine.

4. If the sensor is not within specifications, replace it.

Fig. 1: IAT sensor terminal identification


## Knock Sensor Operation and Function

The operation of the Knock Sensor (KS) is to monitor preignition or "engine
knocks" and send the signal to the ECM. The ECM responds by adjusting ignition
timing until the "knocks" stop.

The sensor works by generating a signal produced by the frequency of the knock
as recorded by the piezoelectric ceramic disc inside the KS. The disc absorbs
the shock waves from the knocks and exerts a pressure on the metal diaphragm
inside the KS. This compresses the crystals inside the disc and the disc
generates a voltage signal proportional to the frequency of the knocks ranging
from zero to 1 volt.


## Knock Sensor Removal and Installation

NOTE: The knock sensors are usually inaccessible without the removal of several
components. It is best to locate the knock sensors and figure out what is
required to be removed, then proceed to the appropriate section for removal of
that component.

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Remove any components necessary to access the sensor(s).

3. Unplug the sensor(s).

4. Remove the sensor-to-engine block retaining bolt.

5. Remove the knock sensor(s).

6. Place the sensor(s) into position and tighten the retaining bolt(s).

7. Plug the sensor(s) connector in.

8. Install any components removed for access.

9. Connect the negative battery cable.

To install:

Fig. 1: Knock sensors are located on the engine block under the intake manifold


## Testing and Monitoring Electronic Engine Sensors

There is real no tests for this sensor, the sensor produces it's own signal
based on information gathered while the engine is running. The sensors also are
usually inaccessible without major component removal. The sensors can be
monitored with an appropriate scan tool using a data display or other data
stream information. Follow the instructions included with the scan tool for
information on accessing the data. The only test available is to test the
continuity of the harness from the ECM to the sensor.


## Pressure Sensor and Intake Air Mass Calculation

The most important information for measuring engine fuel requirements comes from
the pressure sensor. Using the pressure and temperature data, the ECM calculates
the intake air mass. It is connected to the engine intake manifold through a
hose and takes readings of the absolute pressure. A piezoelectric crystal
changes a voltage input to an electrical output which reflects the pressure in
the intake manifold.

Atmospheric pressure is measured both when the engine is started and when
driving fully loaded, then the pressure sensor information is adjusted
accordingly.

The pressure sensor terminal has 3 connectors A, B and C. A is ground, B carries
the output signal to the control unit and C provides the pressure sensor with 5
volts of current from the control unit. The output varies between 0.5–5.0 volts
depending on intake manifold pressure. When the engine is not running,
atmospheric pressure will register at full potential. The sensor is sensitive to
electrical disturbances, therefore it is protected by a metal cover. The signal
strength should be about 4.4 volts at atmospheric pressure.


## Sensor Installation and Removal Procedure

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Remove the bolts securing the bracket to the firewall.

3. Remove the vacuum hose from the sensor.

4. Unplug the connector and remove the sensor.

5. Plug in the sensor connector.

To install:

6. Install the vacuum hose.

7. Install the sensor into place and tighten the bracket retaining bolts.

8. Connect the negative battery cable.


## Testing and Replacement of MAP Sensor for 1993 Volvo 940

1. Turn the key to the ON position, with the engine OFF.

2. Test the voltage of the sensor across terminals A and B of the sensor by
   backprobing the connector.

3. Adding controlled pressure to the vacuum port on the sensor will help to
   verify the sensor's operation. A hand-held pump with a gauge (not a vacuum
   pump) or regulated air pressure can be used.

4. Using the chart in this section for a cross reference, check the voltage in
   relationship to the pressure.

5. If the sensor is not within specifications, replace it.

6. The sensor may also be checked with the engine running; at idle, the sensor
   should read 1.2–1.6v.

Fig. 1: Pressure-to-voltage conversion chart for the MAP sensor

Fig. 2: MAP sensor connector terminal identification

Fig. 3: Typical MAP sensor and terminal (pin) identification


## "Function and Maintenance of the Mass Airflow Sensor in Volvo 940"

Fig. 1: Mass airflow sensor internal components

Fig. 2: MAF sensor location — 850/C70/S70/V70 models

The sensor inside the air mass meter consists of a wire which is maintained at
250°F (120°C), above the ambient air temperature of the air entering the engine.
As the air mass passing over the wire increases, more current is required to
maintain the correct temperature. The amount of current required is used to
calculate the air mass taken in.

When the engine is turned off, any dirt on the wire is burned off electrically
as the element is heated to a temperature of 1832°F (1000°C) for 1 second. Any
dirt remaining on the wire would cause it to send incorrect signals to the
control unit and result in an incorrect air/fuel mixture.


## MAF Sensor Installation Procedure

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Unplug the sensor connector.

3. Remove the two retaining screws for the sensor and remove the sensor.

4. Place the sensor into the air inlet hose.

5. Tighten the retaining screws.

6. Plug in the connector.

7. Connect the negative battery cable.

To install:

Fig. 1: Location of the MAF sensor in the air inlet hose


## Testing and Troubleshooting the MAF Sensor

1. Unplug the connector for the MAF sensor.

2. Using the wiring diagrams found in Section 6, find the signal ground wire.
   Using a DVOM, connect the leads between the signal ground circuit and a
   ground. Resistance should be 0 ohms. If the specification is out of spec,
   repair the wire harness and retest.

3. Using the diagrams, find the signal circuit. Turn the ignition to the ON
   position with the engine OFF. Measure the voltage between the signal circuit
   and ground, voltage should be battery voltage. If voltage is out of spec,
   repair the open in the wiring and retest.

4. Plug the MAF sensor connector in. Using a DVOM backprobe the signal return
   and signal ground. With the key in the ON position and the engine OFF,
   voltage should be 0.1 –0.2v. If voltage is Ok, check all connections to make
   sure that they have good contact. If voltage is out of specification, replace
   the MAF sensor.

Fig. 1: MAF sensor connector terminal identification

Fig. 2: Checking the ground circuit of the MAF sensor

Fig. 3: Checking the signal circuit of the MAF sensor

Fig. 4: Checking the signal return circuit of the MAF sensor


## Throttle Position Sensor Function and Operation

The Throttle Position (TP) sensor is a potentiometer that provides a signal to
the ECM that is directly proportional to the throttle plate position. The TP
sensor is mounted on the side of the throttle body and is connected to the
throttle plate shaft. The TP sensor monitors throttle plate movement and
position, and transmits an appropriate electrical signal to the ECM. These
signals are used by the ECM to adjust the air/fuel mixture, spark timing and EGR
operation according to engine load at idle, part throttle, or full throttle. The
TP sensor is not adjustable.


## Throttle Position Sensor Replacement Procedure

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Remove any components necessary to access the sensor.

3. Remove the connector from the sensor.

4. Remove the mounting screws from the sensor and remove the sensor.

5. Install the sensor onto the throttle plate shaft.

6. Tighten the mounting screws.

7. Install the sensor connector.

8. Install any components removed to access the sensor.

9. Connect the negative battery cable.

To install:

NOTE: The throttle plate shaft is designed to fit a specific way on the sensor,
note the position of the shaft before tightening the bolts.

Fig. 1: Location of the TP sensor on the throttle body


## Testing the TP Sensor for Voltage and Ground

1. With the engine OFF and the ignition ON, check the voltage at the signal
   return circuit of the TP sensor by carefully backprobing the connector using
   a DVOM.

2. Voltage should be between 0.2 and 1.4 volts at idle.

3. Slowly move the throttle pulley to the wide open throttle (WOT) position and
   watch the voltage on the DVOM. The voltage should slowly rise to slightly
   less than 4.8v at Wide Open Throttle (WOT).

4. If no voltage is present, check the wiring harness for supply voltage (5.0v)
   and ground (0.3v or less), by referring to your corresponding wiring guide.
   If supply voltage and ground are present, but no output voltage from TP,
   replace the TP sensor. If supply voltage and ground do not meet
   specifications, make necessary repairs to the harness or ECM.

Fig. 1: Checking the signal return of the TP sensor

Fig. 2: Checking the signal circuit of the TP sensor

Fig. 3: Checking the ground circuit of the TP sensor


## Throttle Switch Function and Operation

Fig. 1: Internal components of the throttle switch

The throttle switch informs the fuel system and ignition system control units
whether the throttle valve is closed or fully opened. The throttle switch is
equipped with micro-switches for idling and full load running.


## Throttle Plate Shaft Switch Installation Procedure

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Remove any components necessary to access the sensor.

3. Remove the connector from the switch.

4. Remove the mounting screws from the sensor and remove the switch.

5. Install the switch onto the throttle plate shaft.

6. Tighten the mounting screws.

7. Install the switch connector.

8. Install any components removed to access the switch.

9. Connect the negative battery cable.

To install:

NOTE: The throttle plate shaft is designed to fit a specific way on the switch,
note the position of the shaft before tightening the bolts.


## Test Idle Switch

1. Unplug the switch connector and connect an ohmmeter to the switch terminals.
   The center terminal is common, terminal No. 1 is the idle switch, terminal
   No. 3 is the full load switch.

2. The idle switch should be closed when the throttle is closed. Any movement of
   the throttle lever will open the switch just before the throttle plate
   actually opens. Operate the switch by hand, if necessary, to determine a
   faulty switch or faulty adjustment.

3. Connect the ohmmeter to the full load switch. The switch should close when
   the throttle lever is 70 degrees off idle, about 1 ⁄ 3 of full stroke.

4. If the switches are good but do not operate at the proper throttle angles,
   check the throttle cable adjustment.

Fig. 1: Throttle switch connector terminal identification


