# ENGINE MECHANICAL


## Left Shaft and Housing Removal

### B234 Engine

NOTE: The use of the correct special tools or their equivalent is required for
this procedure.

### LEFT SHAFT AND HOUSING

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Set the engine to TDC of the No. 1 cylinder.

3. Remove the timing and balance shaft belts.

4. Use a counterhold tool 5362 and remove the left side balance shaft pulley.

5. Remove the air mass meter and inlet hose.

6. Unfasten the bracket under the intake manifold and remove the bracket holding
   the alternator and power steering pump. These may be swung aside and tied
   with wire to the left shock tower.

7. Remove the bolts securing the balance shaft housing to the block. Using an
   extractor tool 5376 or similar, carefully separate the housing from the
   block. The housing must be removed evenly from both its front and rear
   mounts.

8. Clean the joint faces on the cylinder block. Coat new O-rings with engine oil
   and place them in the grooves around the oil passages on the housing. The
   rings can be held in place with a light coating of grease.

9. Coat the balance shafts and bearings with cam lube or moly grease.

To install:

10. Install the balance shaft housing. Make absolutely sure the housing is
    evenly mounted on the front and rear mountings. Tighten the bolts
    alternately in a diagonal pattern. Tighten each bolt 1 ⁄ 2 turn at a time;
    tighten them to 15 ft. lbs. (20 Nm). When all the bolts are at 15 ft. lbs.
    (20 Nm), loosen them individually and tighten each one to 90 inch lbs. (10
    Nm) plug 90 degrees of rotation.

11. If the halves of the housing were split apart during the repair, tighten the
    joint bolts to 72 inch lbs. (8 Nm).

12. Install the drive pulley. Use a counterholding tool. Note that the pulley
    has a slot which will align with the guide on the shaft. The shallow side of
    the pulley faces inward, toward the engine. Tighten the center bolt for the
    pulley to 37 ft. lbs. (50 Nm).

13. Install the bracket for the alternator and power steering pump. Double check
    their connections and hoses.

14. Attach the support under the intake manifold and don't forget the wire clamp
    on the bottom bolt.

15. Install the air mass meter and its intake hose.

16. Install the balance shaft belt and camshaft belt.

17. Connect the negative battery cable.

NOTE: Make certain the shaft does not seize within the housing during
installation.

### RIGHT SHAFT AND HOUSING

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Set the engine to TDC of the No. 1 cylinder.

3. Remove the timing and balance shaft belts.

4. Use a counterhold tool 5362 and remove the left side balance shaft pulley.

5. Remove the balance shaft belt tensioner and remove the bolt running through
   the backing plate to the balance shaft housing.

6. Remove the air mass meter and its air inlet hose.

7. Remove the air preheat hose from the bottom heat shield at the exhaust
   manifold.

8. Remove the nuts holding the right engine mount to the crossmember.

9. Connect a hoist or engine lift apparatus to the top of the engine.

10. Lift the engine at the right side, being careful to maintain clearance
    between the brake master cylinder and the intake manifold.

11. Remove the complete motor mount from the block, including the pad and lower
    mounting plate.

12. Remove the bolts securing the balance shaft housing to the block.

13. Using an extractor tool 5376 or similar, carefully separate the housing from
    the block. The housing must be removed evenly from both its front and rear
    mounts.

14. Clean the joint faces on the cylinder block.

15. Coat new O-rings with engine oil and place them in the grooves around the
    oil passages on the housing. The rings can be held in place with a light
    coating of grease.

16. Install the balance shaft housing. Make absolutely sure the housing is
    evenly mounted on the front and rear mountings. Tighten the bolts
    alternately in a diagonal pattern. Tighten each bolt 1 ⁄ 2 turn at a time;
    tighten them to 15 ft. lbs. (20 Nm). When all the bolts are at 15 ft. lbs.
    (20 Nm), loosen them individually and tighten each one to 7.5 ft. lbs. (10
    Nm) plus 90 degrees of rotation.

17. If the halves of the housing were split apart during the repair, tighten the
    joint bolts to 72 inch lbs. (8 Nm).

18. Install the drive pulley. Use a counterholding tool. Note that the pulley
    has a slot which will align with the guide on the shaft. The shallow side of
    the pulley faces inward, toward the engine. Tighten the center bolt for the
    pulley to 37 ft. lbs. (50 Nm).

19. Install the engine mount onto the block.

20. Using the studs on the crossmember as a guide, lower the engine into place
    on the front crossmember. When the engine is correctly seated, the lifting
    apparatus may be removed.

21. Reinstall the air mass meter and its air intake hose.

22. Reinstall the motor mount bolts and the air preheat tube at the lower part
    of the exhaust manifold.

23. Install the bolt through the backing plate and into the balance shaft
    housing.

24. Reinstall the belt tensioner, tightening the bolt so the pulley is movable
    when the belt is in position.

25. Reinstall the balance shaft and camshaft belts.

26. Connect the negative battery cable.

To install:

NOTE: Make certain the shaft does not seize within the housing during
installation.


## Camshaft Removal and Inspection

The 2.3L 4-cylinder, 2.9L 6-cylinder, and 2.3 and 2.4L 5-cylinder engines all
use camshafts that ride directly over the followers (lifters). After camshaft
removal, they can be lifted out of their bores and inspected. If removal is
necessary, mark the followers to assure their placement in the correct bore.
The 2.8L 6-cylinder engine uses rocker shaft mounted followers. Please refer to
Rocker Arm/Shaft removal/installation for their removal.  NOTE: When installing
a camshaft, always lubricate the camshaft, seats, and lifters with the proper
camshaft lube or moly grease.

### 2.3L 4-Cylinder Engines

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Remove the drive belts.

3. Set the engine to TDC of the No. 1 cylinder.

4. Remove the timing belt.

5. Remove the valve cover.

6. Remove the camshaft center bearing cap. Install camshaft press tool 5021 or
   equivalent over the center bearing journal to hold the camshaft in place
   while removing the other bearing caps.

7. Remove the 4 remaining bearing caps.

8. Remove the seal from the forward edge of the camshaft.

9. Release camshaft press tool and lift out the camshaft.

WARNING Do not rotate the crankshaft while the camshaft is removed from the
cylinder head.

To install:

10. Apply sealant to the outer sealing surfaces of the front and rear caps.

11. Lubricate the camshaft with cam lube or moly grease, and place into
    position. The guide pin for the timing gear should face up.

12. Install the rear bearing cap.

13. Slide the camshaft back and forth to check the camshaft end-play. End-play
    should be 0.004–0.016 in. (0.1–0.4mm).

14. Install the camshaft press tool.

15. Install the camshaft seal.

16. Lubricate and install the remaining caps starting in the center and working
    out.

17. Tighten the bolts to 14 ft. lbs. (20 Nm).

18. Lubricate the front seal and install, using tool 5025 or equivalent.

19. Install the camshaft gear and spacer washer.

20. Remove the tools.

21. Install the timing belt.

22. Install the remaining components.

23. Connect the negative battery cable.



## Engine Component Removal and Installation

### 2.3L 4-Cylinder Engine

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Remove the drive belts and cooling fan.

3. Remove the cooling fan shroud.

4. Remove the center nut on the damper.

5. Remove the damper from the crankshaft.

6. Install the damper on the crankshaft.

7. Tighten the center nut to 44 ft. lbs. (60 Nm) and then an additional 60°.

8. Install the cooling fan shroud.

9. Install the drive belts and cooling fan.

To install:

10. Connect the negative battery cable.



## Engine Disassembly and Cylinder Head Removal

### 2.3L 4-Cylinder Engine

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Drain the engine oil.

3. Remove the overflow tank cap and drain the coolant.

4. Disconnect the upper radiator hose.

5. Remove the distributor cap and wires.

6. Remove the PCV hoses.

7. Remove the EGR valve and vacuum pump.

8. Remove the air pump, if equipped, and air injection manifold.

9. Disconnect and remove all hoses to the turbocharger, if equipped. Plug all
   open hoses and holes immediately.

10. Remove the exhaust manifold and header pipe bracket.

11. Remove the intake manifold.

12. Remove the fuel injectors.

13. Remove the valve cover.

14. Remove the fan and shroud.

15. Set the engine to TDC of the No. 1 cylinder.

16. Remove the timing belt

17. Loosen the cylinder head bolts by reversing the torque sequence.

18. Remove the cylinder head.

NOTE: The cylinder head should be cleaned and inspected prior to installation.
For general cylinder head inspection and overhaul procedures, refer to Engine
Reconditioning later in this section.

To install:

19. Check the position of the crankshaft. No. 1 piston should be at TDC. Check
    the position of the camshaft for cylinder No. 1. Both lobes should be in
    such a position that if the head were installed, the valves would be closed.

20. Install the cylinder head gasket and the cylinder head.

21. Coat a new O-ring for the water pump with coolant and install it in place.

22. Apply a light coat of oil to the head bolts and install.

23. Tighten the head bolts in three steps using the proper sequence.

    A.  Step 1 — Tighten all bolts to 14 ft. lbs. (20 Nm).


    B.  Step 2 — Tighten all bolts to 43 ft. lbs. (60 Nm).


    C.  Step 3 — Angle tighten all bolts an additional 90 degrees.

24. Install the timing belt.

25. Install the shroud and fan.

26. Install the drive belts and pulleys.

27. Install the intake manifold, fuel injection system, throttle cable and valve
    covers.

28. Install the exhaust manifold and header pipe.

29. Install the air pump assembly.

30. If equipped with a turbocharger, install the turbocharger and related parts.

31. Install the EGR valve, vacuum pump, PCV hoses, distributor cap and wires,
    and the overflow tank.

32. Connect the negative battery cable.

33. Fill the radiator with coolant, check the engine oil and transmission fluid.

34. Start the engine and allow it to reach operating temperature.

35. Check the timing.

Fig. 1: Positioning the cylinder head and gasket on the engine block. Check that
the water pump O-ring sits correctly in the groove

Fig. 2: Cylinder head bolt torque sequence for the 2.3L 4cylinder engines



## Engine Fan Removal and Installation

### Electric Cooling Fan

Some models are equipped with electric cooling fans. The fan function is
controlled by a thermocontact placed in the upper right corner of the radiator.
Some vehicles may be equipped with a thermal switch in the radiator end tank or
lower radiator hose. The fan, on most models, will generally switch ON when
coolant temperatures are 190–212°F (88–100°C).


1. Disconnect the negative and positive battery cables.

2. Remove the battery holder, as required.

3. Remove the harness connector on the crossmember.

4. Undo the relay and remove the ground lead from the terminal on the right-hand
   wheel housing in the engine compartment.

5. Remove the fan shroud, if required.

6. Remove the cooling fan mounting bolts.

7. Remove the fan assembly from the vehicle.

8. Install the fan assembly in the vehicle.

9. Tighten the mounting bolts.

To install:

10. Install the fan shroud and tighten the bolts.

11. Connect the ground lead, and attach the relay connector.

12. Attach the connector on the crossmember.

13. Install the battery holder as required.

14. Connect the battery cables.

15. Start the engine and check cooling fan operation.



## Engine Mechanical Specifications

ENGINE MECHANICAL SPECIFICATIONS (GENERAL INFORMATION AND CRANKSHAFT)

ENGINE MECHANICAL SPECIFICATIONS (CRANKSHAFT AND CONNECTING ROD)

ENGINE MECHANICAL SPECIFICATIONS (CONNECTING ROD AND CYLINDER BLOCK)

ENGINE MECHANICAL SPECIFICATIONS (PISTON, PINS AND RINGS)

ENGINE MECHANICAL SPECIFICATIONS (PISTON, PINS AND RINGS, BALANCE SHAFT AND
CAMSHAFT)

ENGINE MECHANICAL SPECIFICATIONS (BALANCE SHAFT AND CYLINDER HEAD)

ENGINE MECHANICAL SPECIFICATIONS (CYLINDER HEADS, VALVES AND SPRINGS)

ENGINE MECHANICAL SPECIFICATIONS (VALVES AND SPRINGS)


## Engine Removal and Installation Process and Tips

In the process of removing the engine, you will come across a number of steps
which call for the removal of a separate component or system, such as
"disconnect the exhaust system'' or "remove the radiator.'' In most instances, a
detailed removal procedure can be found elsewhere in this manual.

It is virtually impossible to list each individual wire and hose which must be
disconnected, simply because so many different model and engine combinations
have been manufactured.

Careful observation and common sense are the best possible approaches to any
repair procedure.  Removal and installation of the engine can be made easier if
you follow these basic points:

If you have to drain any of the fluids, use a suitable container.

Always tag any wires or hoses and, if possible, the components they came from
before disconnecting them.

Because there are so many bolts and fasteners involved, store and label the
retainers from components separately in muffin pans, jars or coffee cans. This
will prevent confusion during installation.

After unbolting the transmission or transaxle, always make sure it is properly
supported.

If it is necessary to disconnect the air conditioning system, have this service
performed by a qualified technician using a recovery/recycling station. If the
system does not have to be disconnected, unbolt the compressor and set it aside.

When unbolting the engine mounts, always make sure the engine is properly
supported. When removing the engine, make sure that any lifting devices are
properly attached to the engine. It is recommended that if your engine is
supplied with lifting hooks, your lifting apparatus be attached to them.

Lift the engine from its compartment slowly, checking that no hoses, wires or
other components are still connected.  After the engine is clear of the
compartment, place it on an engine stand or workbench.  After the engine has
been removed, you can perform a partial or full teardown of the engine using the
procedures outlined in this manual.

NOTE: Although Volvo recommends removing the engine and transmission as an
assembly, we have found the transmission can be left in the vehicle if desired.
If choosing to remove the engine only and leave the transmission in the vehicle,
disregard the transmission, shifter, cables, driveshaft, and mount removal
procedures.

In place of these procedures, the bell housing bolts must be removed, as well as
the torque converter bolts, if equipped with an automatic transmission. Also, a
floorjack or other suitable support must be placed under the transmission.

### 2.3L 4-Cylinder Engine

1. Properly relieve the fuel system pressure.

2. Disconnect the battery cables, negative lead first.

3. Remove the battery.

4. If equipped with a manual transmission, remove the shifter.

5. Disconnect the windshield washer hose and engine compartment light wire.

6. Scribe marks around the hood mount brackets on the underside of the hood for
   later alignment.

7. Remove the hood.

8. Remove the overflow tank cap.

9. Remove the gravel shield from the underside of the radiator.

10. Drain the cooling system.

11. Remove the upper and lower radiator hoses.

12. Disconnect the overflow hoses at the radiator.

13. Disconnect the PCV hose at the cylinder head.

14. If equipped with an automatic transmission, disconnect the oil cooler lines
    at the radiator.

15. Remove the fan assembly.

16. Remove the radiator and fan shroud.

17. Remove the air cleaner.

18. If equipped, disconnect the hoses at the air pump.

19. Remove the air pump and drive belt.

20. Remove the vacuum pump and hoses.

21. Disconnect the power brake booster vacuum hose.

22. Remove the power steering pump, drive belt and bracket. Position aside
    without disconnecting the hydraulic lines.

23. If equipped with A/C, remove the crankshaft pulley and compressor drive
    belt. Then install the pulley again for reference.

24. Disconnect the air conditioning wiring and remove the compressor from the
    bracket. Position the compressor aside without disconnecting the hoses.

25. Remove the bracket.

26. Disconnect the vacuum hoses from the engine.

27. Disconnect the carbon canister hoses.

28. Remove the distributor wire connector, high tension lead, starter cables and
    the clutch cable clamp.

29. Disconnect the wiring harness at the voltage regulator.

30. Disconnect the throttle cable at the pulley and the wire for the A/C at the
    manifold solenoid.

31. Remove the gas cap.

32. Disconnect the fuel lines at the filter and return pipe.

33. At the firewall, remove the electrical connectors for the ballast resistor
    and relays.

34. Disconnect the heater hoses.

35. Unplug the micro-switch connectors at the intake manifold and all remaining
    harness connectors to the engine.

36. If equipped, disconnect the cruise control cables and hoses.

37. Drain the engine oil.

38. Remove the exhaust manifold flange retaining nuts. Loosen the exhaust pipe
    clamp bolts and remove the bracket for the front exhaust pipe mount.

39. Remove the exhaust manifolds from the cylinder head.

40. Raise and safely support the vehicle.

41. From underneath, remove the front motor mount bolts.

42. If equipped with an automatic transmission, place the gear selector lever in
    PARK and disconnect the gear shift control rod from the transmission.

43. On manual transmission vehicles, disconnect the clutch controls.

44. Disconnect the speedometer cable and mark and remove the driveshaft from the
    transmission.

45. On overdrive equipped vehicles, disconnect the control wire from the
    shifter.

46. Use a floor jack and a wooden block and support the weight of the engine
    beneath the transmission.

47. Remove the bolts for the rear transmission mount.

48. Remove the transmission support crossmember.

49. Lift out the engine using the proper lifting equipment.

50. Separate the engine from the transmission.

51. If the engine was rebuilt, install any components removed such as engine
    mounts, lifting eyelets, etc.

NOTE: When removing the engine and transmission as an assembly, they must be
removed at slightly an angle to clear the engine compartment.

To install:

52. Install the engine to the transmission.

53. Attach the engine and transmission to the hoist, and carefully raise the
    engine.

54. Place the engine into the engine compartment carefully, and guide into the
    mounting position.

55. Install and tighten the engine mounts to 37 ft. lbs. (50 Nm).

56. Install the transmission crossmember.

57. Install the rear transmission mount.

58. Remove the hoist.

59. Installation of the remaining components is the reverse of removal.



## Procedure for Removing and Installing Engine Components

NOTE: Before working on the exhaust system, it is a good idea to soak the
retaining hardware with a quality rust penetrant prior to attempting to remove
them. After the penetrant is applied, wait at least 10–15 minutes to let the
penetrant begin to work.

### 2.3L 4-Cylinder Engine

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Remove the air cleaner and all necessary hoses.

3. Remove the EGR valve pipe from the manifold.

4. Remove the exhaust pipe from the exhaust manifold.

5. Remove the turbo, turbo pipes, and attaching hardware.

6. Remove the manifold nuts and manifold.

7. Position and install the manifold using a new gasket.

8. Tighten the manifold bolts to 10–20 ft. lbs. (14–27 Nm).

9. Install the turbo, turbo pipes, and attaching hardware.

To install:

10. Install the EGR valve pipe.

11. Install the air cleaner and any necessary hoses.

12. Connect the negative battery cable.

13. Start the vehicle and check for leaks.



## Timing Belt Replacement and Seal Installation 

### 2.3L (B230 and B230FT) 4-Cylinder Engine

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Remove the cooling fan and shroud.

3. Remove the drive belts and water pump pulley.

4. Remove upper timing belt cover.

5. Set the crankshaft to TDC and remove the timing belt.

6. Carefully pry loose the seal to be replaced. Do not damage the contact face.

7. Clean the contact faces. Lubricate the seal and seat, then press the seal
   into position.

8. Install the timing belt. Make sure the timing belt is correctly positioned.

9. Install the timing belt cover and vibration damper.

NOTE: Do not turn the crankshaft or camshaft. Pistons may strike valves.

To install:

10. Tighten the crankshaft center bolt to 45 ft. lbs. (60 Nm) plus an additional
    60 degrees.

11. Install the drive belts and water pump pulley.

12. Install the cooling fan and shroud.

13. Connect the negative battery cable.

14. Start the engine.

15. Check for leaks and proper operation.



## Intake Manifold Removal and Installation

### 2.3L 4-Cylinder Engine

1. Properly relieve the fuel system pressure.

2. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

3. Remove the air cleaner-to-throttle body hose.

4. If equipped, disconnect the cruise control cables and hoses.

5. Remove the PCV valve.

6. Disconnect the wiring and the fuel hose from the cold start injector. If
   necessary, remove the cold start injector.

7. Disconnect the wiring and the hoses at the auxiliary valve. If necessary,
   remove the auxiliary valve.

8. Remove the intake manifold brace.

9. Label and disconnect the vacuum hoses at the intake manifold.

10. Loosen the clamp for the rubber connecting pipe on the air-fuel control unit
    and remove the boot from the manifold.

11. Remove the manifold bolts and manifold.

12. Clean the gasket mating surfaces thoroughly.

13. Install the intake manifold, using new gaskets, and tighten the bolts to 15
    ft. lbs. (20 Nm).

14. Install the intake manifold brace and the air-fuel control unit connecting
    pipe.

15. Install and connect the auxiliary valve, cold start injector using a new
    gasket, and the PCV valve.

16. Connect all vacuum hoses and electrical connectors.

17. Connect the negative battery cable.

18. Start the engine and bring it to normal operating temperature.

To install:


## Engine Removal and Oil Pan Replacement

### 2.3L 4-Cylinder

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Raise and support the vehicle safely.

3. Drain the engine oil.

4. Remove the splash guard, if equipped.

5. On 2.3L engines, perform the following steps;

    A.  Remove the engine mount retaining nuts.


    B.  Remove the lower bolt and loosen the top bolt on the steering column
    yoke.


    C.  Slide the yoke assembly up on the steering shaft.

6. Raise and safely support the front of the engine.

7. Remove the retaining bolts for the front axle crossmember.

8. Remove the crossmember.

9. Remove the left engine mount.

10. Remove the pan support bracket.

11. Remove the pan bolts and remove the pan.

12. Clean the gasket mating surfaces thoroughly.

13. Install the oil pan and using new gaskets, tighten the bolts in a crisscross
    pattern to 8 ft. lbs. (11 Nm).

14. Lower the engine and install all engine mounts.

15. Install the front crossmember and install the bolts.

16. On 2.3L engines, install the yoke assembly on the steering shaft and tighten
    the bolts to 18 ft. lbs. (24 Nm).

17. Install the splash guard, if equipped.

18. Lower the vehicle.

19. Connect the negative battery cable.

20. Fill the engine with oil.

21. Start the engine and allow it to reach operating temperature.

22. Check for leaks.




## Oil Pump Removal and Installation Procedure

### 2.3L (B230F and B230FT) 4-Cylinder Engine

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Drain and recycle the engine oil.

3. Remove the oil pan.

4. Remove the 2 oil pump retaining bolts.

5. Remove the oil pump and pull the delivery tube from the engine block.

6. Coat new sealing rings with engine oil and install them at either end of the
   delivery tube.

7. Install the pump with the delivery tube attached.

8. Align the pipe to the engine block, so that the seal does not become damaged.

9. Tighten the two oil pump retaining bolts.

To install:

10. Attach the clamp for the oil trap drain hose to the oil pump bolts. Make
    sure the hose is securely clamped behind the oil pump shoulder. Do not
    shorten the hose.

11. Install the oil pan.

12. Fill the engine with oil.

13. Connect the negative battery cable.

14. Start the vehicle and check the oil level.

Fig. 1: Exploded view of the oil pan, rear seal flange, oil pump, and delivery
tube on B230F and B230FT engines


## Radiator Removal and Coolant Drainage

NOTE: Perform this work only on a cold engine.

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Set the heater control to MAX heat.

3. Remove the expansion tank cap.

4. Place a suitable drain pan into position. Open the cock on the right-hand
   side of the engine block. Fit a hose to the cock to collect the coolant. Open
   the radiator draincock.

5. Close the drain cocks when the coolant is completely drained.

6. Remove the cooling fan.

7. Remove the cooling fan shroud.

8. Disconnect the upper and lower radiator hoses

9. On vehicles equipped with automatic transmissions, disconnect the
   transmission oil cooler lines at the radiator. Plug the lines immediately.
   Catch the spillage from the radiator in a separate pan.

10. Some vehicles are equipped with a temp sensor on the driver's side top of
    the radiator, if equipped remove the connector.

11. Remove the radiator retaining bolts and brackets.

12. Remove the radiator assembly from the vehicle.  NOTE: On 850/C70/S70/V70
    models, the radiator comes out the bottom of the vehicle.  To install:

13. Place the radiator into position and install the retaining bolts.

14. On automatic transmission vehicles, connect the oil cooler lines.

15. Install the fan and shroud.

16. Install the lower and upper radiator hoses.

17. Connect the expansion tank hose. Make sure that the overflow hose is clear
    of the fan and is free of any sharp bends.

18. Fill the cooling system through the expansion tank, with a 50 percent
    antifreeze, 50 percent water solution.

19. Connect the negative battery cable.

20. Run the engine until normal operating temperature is reached.

21. Bleed the cooling system.

22. Check for leaks.

23. Top up the cooling system, as required.

24. Replace the cap.

25. Check and top up the automatic transmission fluid level.

Fig. 1: Undo the clamps and remove the radiator hoses

Fig. 2: A pair of retaining ring pliers can be used to release the quick-connect
fittings on the transmission cooler lines

Fig. 3: Remove the line from the radiator; fluid will most likely spill, so
placing a pan underneath is advised

Fig. 4: Plug the cooler line . . .

Fig. 5: . . . and the cooler fitting on the radiator to prevent contamination

Fig. 6: Remove the condenser and radiator upper mounting bolts

Fig. 7: The condenser must be supported after the upper mounting bolts are
removed (two pieces of rope or tiestraps are helpful)

Fig. 8: Remove the lower mounting bolt on the passenger side . . .

Fig. 9: . . . as well as that on the driver's side of the radiator

Fig. 10: After the radiator support brackets are removed . . .

Fig. 11: . . . the radiator can be removed. (On some models such as this 850,
you remove it from below)


## Seal Housing Removal and Installation

### 2.3L 4-Cylinder Engines

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Remove the transmission.

3. Remove the clutch and pressure plate, if equipped.

4. Remove the pilot bearing snapring and remove the bearing.

5. Remove the flywheel or driveplate, as equipped.

6. Remove the rear oil pan brace.

7. Remove the 2 center bolts from the pan that bolt into the seal housing.

8. Loosen 2 bolts on either side of the 2 in the seal housing.

9. Remove the 6 seal housing bolts and remove the seal housing.

NOTE: Be careful not to press in the activator pins for the timing device.

NOTE: Be careful not to damage the oil pan gasket when removing the seal
housing.

10. Remove the seal using special tool 2817 or a suitable replacement.

11. Use a new gasket on the seal housing and coat the seal with oil prior to
    installation. Install the seal.

To install:

12. Install the seal housing and tighten the bolts in a crisscross pattern.

13. Install the rear oil pan brace and flywheel. Tighten the flywheel bolts to
    47–54 ft. lbs. (64–73 Nm) in a crisscross pattern. When installing the
    flywheel turn the crankshaft to bring the No. 1 piston to TDC. The lower
    flywheel pin should be installed approximately 15 degrees from the
    horizontal and opposite the starter.

14. Coat the outside of the pilot bearing and install it on the flywheel.

15. Install the clutch assembly and transmission, as required.

16. Connect the negative battery cable.

17. Fill the transmission with fluid.

18. Start the engine and allow it to reach operating temperature.

19. Check for leaks.




## Valve Cover Removal and Installation

### 2.3L 4-Cylinder Engines

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Label and remove the spark plug wires.

3. Remove the attaching bolts for the valve cover.

4. Remove the valve cover from the cylinder head. If necessary, lightly tap the
   valve cover with a soft hammer to aid in removal.

5. Thoroughly clean the valve cover and cylinder head gasket mating surfaces.

To install:

6. Install the valve cover on the cylinder head using a new gasket.

7. Tighten the valve cover bolts to 14 ft. lbs. (20 Nm) in a crisscross pattern.

8. Install the spark plug wires.

9. Connect the negative battery cable.

10. Start the engine and check for leaks.

Fig. 1: Valve cover and gasket assembly



## Thermostat Replacement and Cooling System Refill

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Drain the cooling system into a suitable container.

3. Disconnect the coolant hose attached to the thermostat housing.

4. Remove the thermostat housing retaining bolts.

5. Remove the thermostat housing, thermostat and gasket. Some thermostats
   require alignment with certain marks or are "clocked" (only fit in the
   housing a certain way), so be sure to pay close attention while removing.

6. Before installing the thermostat, thoroughly clean the mating surfaces.

7. Fit a new gasket and place the thermostat into position.

8. Install the thermostat housing and tighten bolts to proper torque (refer to
   torque specifications in the back of this section).

9. Fill the cooling system through the expansion tank.

To install:

10. Connect the negative battery cable.

11. Start the engine and allow to reach normal operating temperature.

12. Bleed the cooling system.

13. Top up with coolant and check for leaks.

Fig. 1: Remove the radiator hose

Fig. 2: Unfasten the retaining bolts and remove the thermostat housing

Fig. 3: Remove the thermostat from the engine



## Timing Belt Inspection and Replacement Guidelines

The timing belt should be periodically inspected for wear. Removal of the timing
cover is necessary to visually check the belt for signs of wear or
contamination. The belt should show no signs of wear such as cracked teeth, wear
on the belt face, wear on one or both sides of the belt, and there should be no
foreign materials on the belt or between the teeth. If there is oil, coolant,
lubricant, or any other foreign material on the belt, it is a good idea to
replace the belt due to the fact that rapid wear can result from this
contamination. 

Usually sticking to the manufacturer's guide for timing belt
replacement interval will ensure little problems but it is still a good idea to
periodically inspect your belt. If the belt breaks the engine will shut down and
serious engine damage can occur. The proper manufacturer recommended timing belt
replacement interval can be found in Section 1.

Fig. 1: Check for premature parting of the belt

Fig. 2: Check if the teeth are cracked or damaged

Fig. 3: Look for noticeable cracks or wear on the belt face

Fig. 4: You may only have damage on one side of the belt; if so, the guide could
be the culprit

Fig. 5: Foreign materials can get in between the teeth and cause damage

Fig. 6: Inspect the timing belt for cracks, fraying, glazing or damage of any
kind

Fig. 7: Damage on only one side of the timing belt may indicate a faulty guide

Fig. 8: ALWAYS replace the timing belt at the interval specified by the
manufacturer


## Timing Belt Replacement and Tensioner Maintenance 

NOTE: Although not necessary, we recommend that you replace the timing belt
tensioner when replacing the belt. The tensioner can (and often does) leak
hydraulic fluid, and can seize, causing the belt to break.

### B230F and B230FT Engines

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Remove the timing belt cover as described in this section.

3. Set the engine to TDC of the No. 1 cylinder.

4. To remove the tension from the belt, loosen the nut for the tensioner and
   press the idler roller back. The tension spring can be locked in this
   position by inserting the shank end of a 3mm drill through the pusher rod.

5. Remove the 6 retaining bolts and the crankshaft pulley.

6. Remove the belt, taking care not to bend it at any sharp angles. The belt
   should be replaced at 45,000 mile (72,500 km) intervals, if it becomes oil
   soaked or frayed or if it is on a vehicle that has been sitting idle for any
   length of time.

7. If the crankshaft, idler shaft or camshaft were disturbed while the belt was
   out, align each shaft with its corresponding index mark to assure proper
   valve timing and ignition timing, as follows:

To install:


    A.  Rotate the crankshaft so the notch in the convex crankshaft gear belt
    guide aligns with the embossed mark on the front cover (12 o'clock
    position).


    B.  Rotate the idler shaft so the dot on the idler shaft drive sprocket
    aligns with the notch on the timing belt rear cover (4 o'clock position).


    C.  Rotate the camshaft so the notch in the camshaft sprocket inner belt
    guide aligns with the notch in the forward edge of the valve cover (12
    o'clock position).

8. Install the timing belt (don't use any sharp tools) over the sprockets and
   then over the tensioner roller. Some new belts have yellow marks. The 2 lines
   on the drive belt should fit toward the crankshaft marks. The next mark
   should then fit toward the intermediate shaft marks, etc.

9. Loosen the tensioner nut and let the spring tension automatically take up the
   slack. Tighten the tensioner nut to 37 ft. lbs. (51 Nm).

10. Rotate the crankshaft one full revolution clockwise and make sure the timing
    marks still align.

11. Install the drive belts, radiator fan and shroud.

12. Connect the negative battery cable.



## Engine Disassembly and Reassembly

### 2.3L 4-Cylinder Engine

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Remove the cooling fan and shroud.

3. Remove the drive belts.

4. Remove the water pump pulley.

5. Remove the 4 retaining bolts and lift off the timing belt cover.

6. Clean all gasket mating surfaces thoroughly.

7. Install the timing belt cover using a new gasket.

8. Install the water pump pulley, and all drive belts.

9. Install the fan and shroud.

To install:

10. Connect the negative battery cable.

11. Start the engine and check for leaks.




## Engine Disassembly and Preparation

NOTE: Before working on the exhaust system, it is a good idea to soak the
retaining hardware with a quality rust penetrant prior to attempting to remove
them. After the penetrant is applied, wait at least 10–15 minutes to let the
penetrant begin to work.

### 2.3L 4-Cylinder Engine

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Remove preheater hose to the air cleaner.

3. Remove the pipe and rubber bellows between the air/fuel control unit and the
   turbocharger unit.

4. Pull out the crankcase ventilation hose from the pipe.

5. Remove the pipe and pipe connector between the turbocharger unit and the
   intake manifold.

6. Disconnect the exhaust pipe and place aside.

7. Remove the upper heat shield.

8. Remove the brace between the turbocharger unit and the manifold.

9. Remove the lower heat shield by removing the retaining screw under the
   manifold.

NOTE: Cover the turbocharger intake and outlet ports to keep dirt out of the
system.

10. Remove the oil pipe clamp, retaining screws on the turbo unit and the pipe
    connection screw in the cylinder block under the manifold. Do not allow any
    dirt to enter the oil passages.

11. Remove the manifold retaining nuts and washers. Leave one nut in place to
    keep the manifold in position.

12. Remove the oil delivery pipe. Cover the opening on the turbo unit.

13. Disconnect the air/fuel control unit by loosening the clamps.

14. Move the unit with the lower section of the air cleaner up to the right side
    wheel housing. Place a cover over the wheel housing as protection.

15. Remove the remaining nut and washer on the manifold.

16. Lift the assembly forward and up.

17. Remove the manifold gaskets.

18. Disconnect the return oil pipe O-ring from the cylinder block.

19. Disconnect the turbocharger unit from the manifold.

To install:

NOTE: Be sure to use a new gasket for the exhaust manifold and a new O-ring to
the return oil pipe. Coat the O-ring with oil prior to installing. Keep
everything clean during assembly and use extreme care to keep dirt out of the
various turbo inlet and outlet pipes and hoses.

20. Install the turbocharger on the exhaust manifold and tighten the bolts as
    follows:

    A.  Step 1 — 7 ft. lbs. (10 Nm)


    B.  Step 2 — 30 ft. lbs. (40 Nm)


    C.  Step 3 — Tighten all bolts an additional 120 degrees ( 1 ⁄ 3 turn).

21. Install the exhaust manifold and turbocharger assembly on the engine.

22. Connect all oil pipes from and to the turbocharger using new O-rings.

23. Install the air/fuel control unit and air cleaner.

24. Install the heat shields, spark plug wires, exhaust pipes, preheater
    assembly and expansion tank.

25. Connect the negative battery cable.

26. Disconnect the wire at terminal 15 (brown) of the ignition coil. Use the
    ignition key to crank the engine for about 30 seconds. This circulates oil
    to the turbocharger, providing proper start-up lubrication.

27. Turn the ignition OFF, reconnect the coil wire, start the engine and allow
    it to idle for a few minutes prior to test driving.

Fig. 1: Turbocharger system component locations — B230FT engine

Fig. 2: Disconnect the turbo unit from the exhaust manifold

Fig. 3: Lubricating the exhaust manifold bolts with a proper rust penetrant or
lubricant aids their installation into the cylinder head. Note the manifold bolt
locations

