# ENGINE RECONDITIONING


## Factors to Consider Before Rebuilding Your Engine

Now that you have determined that your engine is worn out, you must make some
decisions. The question of whether or not an engine is worth rebuilding is
largely a subjective matter and one of personal worth. Is the engine a popular
one, or is it an obsolete model? Are parts available? Will it get acceptable gas
mileage once it is rebuilt? Is the car its being put into worth keeping? Would
it be less expensive to buy a new engine, have your engine rebuilt by a pro,
rebuild it yourself or buy a used engine from a salvage yard? Or would it be
simpler and less expensive to buy another car? If you have considered all these
matters and more, and have still decided to rebuild the engine, then it is time
to decide how you will rebuild it.

NOTE: The editors feel that most engine machining should be performed by a
professional machine shop. Don't think of it as wasting money, rather, as an
assurance that the job has been done right the first time. There are many
expensive and specialized tools required to perform such tasks as boring and
honing an engine block or having a valve job done on a cylinder head. Even
inspecting the parts requires expensive micrometers and gauges to properly
measure wear and clearances. Also, a machine shop can deliver to you clean, and
ready to assemble parts, saving you time and aggravation. Your maximum savings
will come from performing the removal, disassembly, assembly and installation of
the engine and purchasing or renting only the tools required to perform the
above tasks. Depending on the particular circumstances, you may save 40 to 60
percent of the cost doing these yourself.  

A complete rebuild or overhaul of an engine involves replacing all of the moving
parts (pistons, rods, crankshaft, camshaft, etc.) with new ones and machining
the non-moving wearing surfaces of the block and heads. Unfortunately, this may
not be cost effective. For instance, your crankshaft may have been damaged or
worn, but it can be machined undersize for a minimal fee.  So, as you can see,
you can replace everything inside the engine, but, it is wiser to replace only
those parts which are really needed, and, if possible, repair the more expensive
ones.  Later in this section, we will break the engine down into its two main
components: the cylinder head and the engine block. We will discuss each
component, and the recommended parts to replace during a rebuild on each.


## Proper Installation of Valve Components in OHC Engines

The first step for any assembly job is to have a clean area in which to work.
Next, thoroughly clean all of the parts and components that are to be assembled.
Finally, place all of the components onto a suitable work space and, if
necessary, arrange the parts to their respective positions.

OHC Engines

### CUP TYPE CAMSHAFT FOLLOWERS

To install the springs, retainers and valve locks on heads which have these
components recessed into the camshaft follower's bore, you will need a small
screwdriver-type tool, some clean white grease and a lot of patience. You will
also need the C-clamp style spring compressor and the OHC tool used to
disassemble the head.

1. Lightly lubricate the valve stems and insert all of the valves into the
   cylinder head. If possible, maintain their original locations.

2. If equipped, install any valve spring shims which were removed.

3. If equipped, install the new valve seals, keeping the following in mind: If
   the valve seal presses over the guide, lightly lubricate the outer guide
   surfaces.  If the seal is an O-ring type, it is installed just after
   compressing the spring but before the valve locks.

4. Place the valve spring and retainer over the stem.

5. Position the spring compressor and the OHC tool, then compress the spring.

6. Using a small screwdriver as a spatula, fill the valve stem side of the lock
   with white grease. Use the excess grease on the screwdriver to fasten the
   lock to the driver.

7. Carefully install the valve lock, which is stuck to the end of the
   screwdriver, to the valve stem then press on it with the screwdriver until
   the grease squeezes out. The valve lock should now be stuck to the stem.

8. Repeat Steps 6 and 7 for the remaining valve lock.

9. Relieve the spring pressure slowly and insure that neither valve lock becomes
   dislodged by the retainer.

10. Remove the spring compressor tool.

11. Repeat Steps 2 through 10 until all of the springs have been installed.

12. Install the followers, camshaft(s) and any other components that were
    removed for disassembly.  Fig. 1: Once assembled, check the valve clearance
    and correct as needed

### ROCKER ARM TYPE CAMSHAFT FOLLOWERS

1. Lightly lubricate the valve stems and insert all of the valves into the
   cylinder head. If possible, maintain their original locations.

2. If equipped, install any valve spring shims which were removed.

3. If equipped, install the new valve seals, keeping the following in mind: If
   the valve seal presses over the guide, lightly lubricate the outer guide
   surfaces.  If the seal is an O-ring type, it is installed just after
   compressing the spring but before the valve locks.

4. Place the valve spring and retainer over the stem.

5. Position the spring compressor tool and compress the spring.

6. Assemble the valve locks to the stem.

7. Relieve the spring pressure slowly and insure that neither valve lock becomes
   dislodged by the retainer.

8. Remove the spring compressor tool.

9. Repeat Steps 2 through 8 until all of the springs have been installed.

10. Install the camshaft(s), rockers, shafts and any other components that were
    removed for disassembly.


## Proper Labeling and Identification of Cylinder Head Components

Whether it is a single or dual overhead camshaft cylinder head, the disassembly
procedure is relatively unchanged. One aspect to pay attention to is careful
labeling of the parts on the dual camshaft cylinder head. There will be an
intake camshaft and followers as well as an exhaust camshaft and followers and
they must be labeled as such. In some cases, the components are identical and
could easily be installed incorrectly. DO NOT MIX THEM UP! Determining which is
which is very simple; the intake camshaft and components are on the same side of
the head as was the intake manifold. Conversely, the exhaust camshaft and
components are on the same side of the head as was the exhaust manifold.

Fig. 1: Exploded view of a valve, seal, spring, retainer and locks from an OHC
cylinder head

Fig. 2: Example of a multi-valve cylinder head. Note how it has 2 intake and 2
exhaust valve ports

### CUP TYPE CAMSHAFT FOLLOWERS 

Most cylinder heads with cup type camshaft followers will have the valve spring,
retainer and locks recessed within the follower's bore. You will need a C-clamp
style valve spring compressor tool, an OHC spring removal tool (or equivalent)
and a small magnet to disassemble the head.

Fig. 3: C-clamp type spring compressor and an OHC spring removal tool (center)
for cup type followers

1. If not already removed, remove the camshaft(s) and/or followers. Mark their
   positions for assembly.  Fig. 4: Most cup type follower cylinder heads retain
   the camshaft using bolt-on bearing caps

2. Position the cylinder head to allow use of a C-clamp style valve spring
   compressor tool.

NOTE: It is preferred to position the cylinder head gasket surface facing you
with the valve springs facing the opposite direction and the head laying
horizontal.

Fig. 5: Position the OHC spring tool in the follower bore, then compress the
spring with a C-clamp type tool

3. With the OHC spring removal adapter tool positioned inside of the follower
   bore, compress the valve spring using the C-clamp style valve spring
   compressor.

4. Remove the valve locks. A small magnetic tool or screwdriver will aid in
   removal.

5. Release the compressor tool and remove the spring assembly.

6. Withdraw the valve from the cylinder head.

7. If equipped, remove the valve seal.

NOTE: Special valve seal removal tools are available. Regular or needlenose type
pliers, if used with care, will work just as well. If using ordinary pliers, be
sure not to damage the follower bore. The follower and its bore are machined to
close tolerances and any damage to the bore will effect this relationship.

8. If equipped, remove the valve spring shim. A small magnetic tool or
   screwdriver will aid in removal.

9. Repeat Steps 3 through 8 until all of the valves have been removed.

### ROCKER ARM TYPE CAMSHAFT FOLLOWERS

Most cylinder heads with rocker arm-type camshaft followers are easily
disassembled using a standard valve spring compressor. However, certain models
may not have enough open space around the spring for the standard tool and may
require you to use a C-clamp style compressor tool instead.

Fig. 6: Example of the shaft mounted rocker arms on some

OHC heads

Fig. 7: Another example of the rocker arm type OHC head.  This model uses a
follower under the camshaft

1. If not already removed, remove the rocker arms and/or shafts and the
   camshaft. If applicable, also remove the hydraulic lash adjusters. Mark their
   positions for assembly.

Fig. 8: Before the camshaft can be removed, all of the followers must first be
removed . . .

Fig. 9: . . . then the camshaft can be removed by sliding it out (shown), or
unbolting a bearing cap (not shown)

2. Position the cylinder head to allow access to the valve spring.

3. Use a valve spring compressor tool to relieve the spring tension from the
   retainer.

Fig. 10: Compress the valve spring . . .

NOTE: Due to engine varnish, the retainer may stick to the valve locks. A gentle
tap with a hammer may help to break it loose.

Fig. 11: . . . then remove the valve locks from the valve stem and spring
retainer

4. Remove the valve locks from the valve tip and/or retainer. A small magnet may
   help in removing the small locks.

5. Lift the valve spring, tool and all, off of the valve stem.

Fig. 12: Remove the valve spring and retainer from the cylinder head

6. If equipped, remove the valve seal. If the seal is difficult to remove with
   the valve in place, try removing the valve first, then the seal. Follow the
   steps below for valve removal.

Fig. 13: Remove the valve seal from the guide. Some gentle prying or pliers may
help to remove stubborn ones

7. Position the head to allow access for withdrawing the valve.

NOTE: Cylinder heads that have seen a lot of miles and/or abuse may have
mushroomed the valve lock grove and/or tip, causing difficulty in removal of the
valve. If this has happened, use a metal file to carefully remove the high spots
around the lock grooves and/or tip. Only file it enough to allow removal.

8. Remove the valve from the cylinder head.

Fig. 14: All aluminum and some cast iron heads will have these valve spring
shims. Remove all of them as well

9.
10. If equipped, remove the valve spring shim. A small magnetic tool or
    screwdriver will aid in removal.  Repeat Steps 3 though 9 until all of the
    valves have been removed.


## Valve Inspection and Wear Analysis

Now that all of the cylinder head components are clean, its time to inspect them
for wear and/or damage. To accurately inspect them, you will need some
specialized tools:

- A 0–1 in. micrometer for the valves
- A dial indicator or inside diameter gauge for the valve guides
- A spring pressure test gauge

If you do not have access to the proper tools, you may want to bring the
components to a shop that does.

### Valves

The first thing to inspect are the valve heads. Look closely at the head, margin
and face for any cracks, excessive wear or burning. The margin is the best place
to look for burning. It should have a squared edge with an even width all around
the diameter. When a valve burns, the margin will look melted and the edges
rounded. Also inspect the valve head for any signs of tulipping. This will show
as a lifting of the edges or dishing in the center of the head and will usually
not occur to all of the valves. All of the heads should look the same, any that
seem dished more than others are probably bad. Next, inspect the valve lock
grooves and valve tips. Check for any burrs around the lock grooves, especially
if you had to file them to remove the valve. Valve tips should appear flat,
although slight rounding with high mileage engines is normal. Slightly worn
valve tips will need to be machined flat. Last, measure the valve stem diameter
with the micrometer. Measure the area that rides within the guide, especially
towards the tip where most of the wear occurs. Take several measurements along
its length and compare them to each other. Wear should be even along the length
with little to no taper. If no minimum diameter is given in the specifications,
then the stem should not read more than 0.001 in. (0.025mm) below the
specification. Any valves that fail these inspections should be replaced.

Fig. 1: Valve stems may be rolled on a flat surface to check for bends

Fig. 2: Use a micrometer to check the valve stem diameter

### Springs, Retainers and Valve Locks

The first thing to check is the most obvious, broken springs. Next check the
free length and squareness of each spring. If applicable, insure to distinguish
between intake and exhaust springs. Use a ruler and/or carpenters square to
measure the length. A carpenters square should be used to check the springs for
squareness. If a spring pressure test gauge is available, check each springs
rating and compare to the specifications chart. Check the readings against the
specifications given. Any springs that fail these inspections should be
replaced.

The spring retainers rarely need replacing, however they should still be checked
as a precaution. Inspect the spring mating surface and the valve lock retention
area for any signs of excessive wear. Also check for any signs of cracking.
Replace any retainers that are questionable.

Valve locks should be inspected for excessive wear on the outside contact area
as well as on the inner notched surface. Any locks which appear worn or broken
and its respective valve should be replaced.

Fig. 3: Use a caliper to check the valve spring free-length

Fig. 4: Check the valve spring for squareness on a flat surface; a carpenter's
square can be used

### Cylinder Head

There are several things to check on the cylinder head: valve guides, seats,
cylinder head surface flatness, cracks and physical damage.

### VALVE GUIDES

Now that you know the valves are good, you can use them to check the guides,
although a new valve, if available, is preferred. Before you measure anything,
look at the guides carefully and inspect them for any cracks, chips or breakage.
Also if the guide is a removable style (as in most aluminum heads), check them
for any looseness or evidence of movement. All of the guides should appear to be
at the same height from the spring seat. If any seem lower (or higher) from
another, the guide has moved. Mount a dial indicator onto the spring side of the
cylinder head. Lightly oil the valve stem and insert it into the cylinder head.
Position the dial indicator against the valve stem near the tip and zero the
gauge. Grasp the valve stem and wiggle towards and away from the dial indicator
and observe the readings. Mount the dial indicator 90 degrees from the initial
point and zero the gauge and again take a reading. Compare the two readings for
a out of round condition. Check the readings against the specifications given.
An Inside Diameter (I.D.) gauge designed for valve guides will give you an
accurate valve guide bore measurement. If the I.D. gauge is used, compare the
readings with the specifications given. Any guides that fail these inspections
should be replaced or machined.

Fig. 5: A dial gauge may be used to check valve stem-toguide clearance; read the
gauge while moving the valve stem

### VALVE SEATS

A visual inspection of the valve seats should show a slightly worn and pitted
surface where the valve face contacts the seat. Inspect the seat carefully for
severe pitting or cracks. Also, a seat that is badly worn will be recessed into
the cylinder head. A severely worn or recessed seat may need to be replaced. All
cracked seats must be replaced. A seat concentricity gauge, if available, should
be used to check the seat run-out. If run-out exceeds specifications the seat
must be machined (if no specification is given use 0.002 in. or 0.051mm).

### CYLINDER HEAD SURFACE FLATNESS

After you have cleaned the gasket surface of the cylinder head of any old gasket
material, check the head for flatness.

Fig. 6: Check the head for flatness across the center of the head surface using
a straightedge and feeler gauge

Fig. 7: Checks should also be made along both diagonals of the head surface

Place a straightedge across the gasket surface. Using feeler gauges, determine
the clearance at the center of the straightedge and across the cylinder head at
several points. Check along the centerline and diagonally on the head surface.
If the warpage exceeds 0.003 in. (0.076mm) within a 6.0 in. (15.2cm) span, or
0.006 in. (0.152mm) over the total length of the head, the cylinder head must be
resurfaced. After resurfacing the heads of a V-type engine, the intake manifold
flange surface should be checked, and if necessary, milled proportionally to
allow for the change in its mounting position.

### CRACKS AND PHYSICAL DAMAGE 

Generally, cracks are limited to the combustion
chamber, however, it is not uncommon for the head to crack in a spark plug hole,
port, outside of the head or in the valve spring/rocker arm area. The first area
to inspect is always the hottest: the exhaust seat/port area.  A visual
inspection should be performed, but just because you don't see a crack does not
mean it is not there. Some more reliable methods for inspecting for cracks
include Magnaflux® , a magnetic process or Zyglo® , a dye penetrant. Magnaflux®
is used only on ferrous metal (cast iron) heads. Zyglo® uses a spray on
fluorescent mixture along with a black light to reveal the cracks. It is
strongly recommended to have your cylinder head checked professionally for
cracks, especially if the engine was known to have overheated and/or leaked or
consumed coolant. Contact a local shop for availability and pricing of these
services.

Physical damage is usually very evident. For example, a broken mounting ear from
dropping the head or a bent or broken stud and/or bolt. All of these defects
should be fixed or, if unrepairable, the head should be replaced.

Camshaft and Followers

Inspect the camshaft(s) and followers as described earlier in this section.


## Valve Maintenance and Refacing Procedures

Many of the procedures given for refinishing and repairing the cylinder head
components must be performed by a machine shop. Certain steps, if the inspected
part is not worn, can be performed yourself inexpensively. However, you spent a
lot of time and effort so far, why risk trying to save a couple bucks if you
might have to do it all over again?

### Valves

Any valves that were not replaced should be refaced and the tips ground flat.
Unless you have access to a valve grinding machine, this should be done by a
machine shop. If the valves are in extremely good condition, as well as the
valve seats and guides, they may be lapped in without performing machine work.

It is a recommended practice to lap the valves even after machine work has been
performed and/or new valves have been purchased. This insures a positive seal
between the valve and seat.

### LAPPING THE VALVES

NOTE: Before lapping the valves to the seats, read the rest of the cylinder head
section to insure that any related parts are in acceptable enough condition to
continue.

NOTE: Before any valve seat machining and/or lapping can be performed, the
guides must be within factory recommended specifications.

1. Invert the cylinder head.

2. Lightly lubricate the valve stems and insert them into the cylinder head in
their numbered order.

3. Raise the valve from the seat and apply a small amount of fine lapping
compound to the seat.

4. Moisten the suction head of a hand-lapping tool and attach it to the head of
the valve.

5. Rotate the tool between the palms of both hands, changing the position of the
valve on the valve seat and lifting the tool often to prevent grooving.

6. Lap the valve until a smooth, polished circle is evident on the valve and
seat.

7. Remove the tool and the valve. Wipe away all traces of the grinding compound
and store the valve to maintain its lapped location.

WARNING Do not get the valves out of order after they have been lapped. They
must be put back with the same valve seat with which they were lapped.

### Springs, Retainers and Valve Locks

There is no repair or refinishing possible with the springs, retainers and valve
locks. If they are found to be worn or defective, they must be replaced with new
(or known good) parts.

### Cylinder Head

Most refinishing procedures dealing with the cylinder head must be performed by
a machine shop. Read the sections below and review your inspection data to
determine whether or not machining is necessary.

### VALVE GUIDE

NOTE: If any machining or replacements are made to the valve guides, the seats
must be machined.  Unless the valve guides need machining or replacing, the only
service to perform is to thoroughly clean them of any dirt or oil residue.
There are only two types of valve guides used on automobile engines: the
replaceable-type (all aluminum heads) and the cast-in integral-type (most cast
iron heads). There are four recommended methods for repairing worn guides.

- Knurling
- Inserts
- Reaming oversize
- Replacing

Knurling is a process in which metal is displaced and raised, thereby reducing
clearance, giving a true center, and providing oil control. It is the least
expensive way of repairing the valve guides. However, it is not necessarily the
best, and in some cases, a knurled valve guide will not stand up for more than a
short time. It requires a special knurlizer and precision reaming tools to
obtain proper clearances. It would not be cost effective to purchase these
tools, unless you plan on rebuilding several of the same cylinder head.

Installing a guide insert involves machining the guide to accept a bronze
insert. One style is the coil-type which is installed into a threaded guide.
Another is the thin-walled insert where the guide is reamed oversize to accept a
split-sleeve insert. After the insert is installed, a special tool is then run
through the guide to expand the insert, locking it to the guide. The insert is
then reamed to the standard size for proper valve clearance.

Reaming for oversize valves restores normal clearances and provides a true valve
seat. Most cast-in type guides can be reamed to accept an valve with an oversize
stem. The cost factor for this can become quite high as you will need to
purchase the reamer and new, oversize stem valves for all guides which were
reamed. Oversizes are generally 0.003 to 0.030 in. (0.076 to 0.762mm), with
0.015 in. (0.381mm) being the most common.

To replace cast-in type valve guides, they must be drilled out, then reamed to
accept replacement guides. This must be done on a fixture which will allow
centering and leveling off of the original valve seat or guide, otherwise a
serious guide-to-seat misalignment may occur making it impossible to properly
machine the seat.

Replaceable-type guides are pressed into the cylinder head. A hammer and a
stepped drift or punch may be used to install and remove the guides. Before
removing the guides, measure the protrusion on the spring side of the head and
record it for installation. Use the stepped drift to hammer out the old guide
from the combustion chamber side of the head. When installing, determine whether
or not the guide also seals a water jacket in the head, and if it does, use the
recommended sealing agent. If there is no water jacket, grease the valve guide
and its bore.

Use the stepped drift, and hammer the new guide into the cylinder head from the
spring side of the cylinder head. A stack of washers the same thickness as the
measured protrusion may help the installation process.

### VALVE SEATS

NOTE: Before any valve seat machining can be performed, the guides must be
within factory recommended specifications.

NOTE: If any machining or replacements were made to the valve guides, the seats
must be machined.

If the seats are in good condition, the valves can be lapped to the seats, and
the cylinder head assembled. See the valves section for instructions on lapping.

If the valve seats are worn, cracked or damaged, they must be serviced by a
machine shop. The valve seat must be perfectly centered to the valve guide,
which requires very accurate machining.

### CYLINDER HEAD SURFACE

If the cylinder head is warped, it must be machined flat. If the warpage is
extremely severe, the head may need to be replaced. In some instances, it may be
possible to straighten a warped head enough to allow machining. In either case,
contact a professional machine shop for service.

NOTE: Any OHC cylinder head that shows excessive warpage should have the
camshaft bearing journals align bored after the cylinder head has been
resurfaced.

WARNING Failure to align bore the camshaft bearing journals could result in
severe engine damage including but not limited to: valve and piston damage,
connecting rod damage, camshaft and/or crankshaft breakage.

### CRACKS AND PHYSICAL DAMAGE

Certain cracks can be repaired in both cast iron and aluminum heads. For cast
iron, a tapered threaded insert is installed along the length of the crack.
Aluminum can also use the tapered inserts, however welding is the preferred
method. Some physical damage can be repaired through brazing or welding. Contact
a machine shop to get expert advice for your particular dilemma.


## Importance of Regular Maintenance for Engine Longevity

Anything that generates heat and/or friction will eventually burn or wear out
(i.e. a light bulb generates heat, therefore its life span is limited). With
this in mind, a running engine generates tremendous amounts of both; friction is
encountered by the moving and rotating parts inside the engine and heat is
created by friction and combustion of the fuel. However, the engine has systems
designed to help reduce the effects of heat and friction and provide added
longevity. The oiling system reduces the amount of friction encountered by the
moving parts inside the engine, while the cooling system reduces heat created by
friction and combustion. If either system is not maintained, a break-down will
be inevitable. Therefore, you can see how regular maintenance can affect the
service life of your vehicle. If you do not drain, flush and refill your cooling
system at the proper intervals, deposits will begin to accumulate in the
radiator, thereby reducing the amount of heat it can extract from the coolant.
The same applies to your oil and filter; if it is not changed often enough it
becomes laden with contaminates and is unable to properly lubricate the engine.
This increases friction and wear.

There are a number of methods for evaluating the condition of your engine. A
compression test can reveal the condition of your pistons, piston rings,
cylinder bores, head gasket(s), valves and valve seats. An oil pressure test can
warn you of possible engine bearing, or oil pump failures. Excessive oil
consumption, evidence of oil in the engine air intake area and/or bluish smoke
from the tail pipe may indicate worn piston rings, worn valve guides and/or
valve seals. As a general rule, an engine that uses no more than one quart of
oil every 1000 miles is in good condition. Engines that use one quart of oil or
more in less than 1000 miles should first be checked for oil leaks. If any oil
leaks are present, have them fixed before determining how much oil is consumed
by the engine, especially if blue smoke is not visible at the tail pipe.


## Cylinder Compression Check Procedure

A noticeable lack of engine power, excessive oil consumption and/or poor fuel
mileage measured over an extended period are all indicators of internal engine
wear. Worn piston rings, scored or worn cylinder bores, blown head gaskets,
sticking or burnt valves, and worn valve seats are all possible culprits. A
check of each cylinder's compression will help locate the problem.

NOTE: A screw-in type compression gauge is more accurate than the type you
simply hold against the spark plug hole. Although it takes slightly longer to
use, its worth the effort to obtain a more accurate reading.

1. Make sure that the proper amount and viscosity of engine oil is in the
crankcase, then ensure the battery is fully charged.

2. Warm-up the engine to normal operating temperature, then shut the engine OFF.

3. Disable the ignition system.

4. Label and disconnect all of the spark plug wires from the plugs.

5. Thoroughly clean the cylinder head area around the spark plug ports, then
remove the spark plugs.

6. Set the throttle plate to the fully open (wide-open throttle) position. You
can block the accelerator linkage open for this, or you can have an assistant
fully depress the accelerator pedal.

Fig. 1: A screw-in type compression gauge is more accurate and easier to use
without an assistant

7. Install a screw-in type compression gauge into the No. 1 spark plug hole
until the fitting is snug.

WARNING Be careful not to crossthread the spark plug hole.

8. According to the tool manufacturer's instructions, connect a remote starting
switch to the starting circuit.

9. With the ignition switch in the OFF position, use the remote starting switch
to crank the engine through at least five compression strokes (approximately 5
seconds of cranking) and record the highest reading on the gauge.

10. Repeat the test on each cylinder, cranking the engine approximately the same
number of compression strokes and/or time as the first.

11. Compare the highest readings from each cylinder to that of the others. The
indicated compression pressures are considered within specifications if the
lowest reading cylinder is within 75 percent of the pressure recorded for the
highest reading cylinder. For example, if your highest reading cylinder pressure
was 150 psi (1034 kPa), then 75 percent of that would be 113 psi (779 kPa). So
the lowest reading cylinder should be no less than 113 psi (779 kPa).

12. If a cylinder exhibits an unusually low compression reading, pour a
tablespoon of clean engine oil into the cylinder through the spark plug hole and
repeat the compression test. If the compression rises after adding oil, it means
that the cylinder's piston rings and/or cylinder bore are damaged or worn. If
the pressure remains low, the valves may not be seating properly (a valve job is
needed), or the head gasket may be blown near that cylinder. If compression in
any two adjacent cylinders is low, and if the addition of oil doesn't help raise
compression, there is leakage past the head gasket. Oil and coolant in the
combustion chamber, combined with blue or constant white smoke from the tail
pipe, are symptoms of this problem. However, don't be alarmed by the normal
white smoke emitted from the tail pipe during engine warm-up or from cold
weather driving. There may be evidence of water droplets on the engine dipstick
and/or oil droplets in the cooling system if a head gasket is blown.


## Engine Oil Pressure Testing Procedure

Check for proper oil pressure at the sending unit passage with an externally
mounted mechanical oil pressure gauge (as opposed to relying on a factory
installed dash-mounted gauge). A tachometer may also be needed, as some
specifications may require running the engine at a specific rpm.

1. With the engine cold, locate and remove the oil pressure sending unit.

2. Following the manufacturer's instructions, connect a mechanical oil pressure
gauge and, if necessary, a tachometer to the engine.

3. Start the engine and allow it to idle.

4. Check the oil pressure reading when cold and record the number. You may need
to run the engine at a specified rpm, so check the specifications chart located
earlier in this section.

5. Run the engine until normal operating temperature is reached (upper radiator
hose will feel warm).

6. Check the oil pressure reading again with the engine hot and record the
number. Turn the engine OFF.

7. Compare your hot oil pressure reading to that given in the chart. If the
reading is low, check the cold pressure reading against the chart. If the cold
pressure is well above the specification, and the hot reading was lower than the
specification, you may have the wrong viscosity oil in the engine. Change the
oil, making sure to use the proper grade and quantity, then repeat the test.

Low oil pressure readings could be attributed to internal component wear, pump
related problems, a low oil level, or oil viscosity that is too low. High oil
pressure readings could be caused by an overfilled crankcase, too high of an oil
viscosity or a faulty pressure relief valve.


## Crankshaft Preparation and Installation

Before you begin assembling the engine, first give yourself a clean, dirt free
work area. Next, clean every engine component again. The key to a good assembly
is cleanliness.

Mount the engine block into the engine stand and wash it one last time using
water and detergent (dishwashing detergent works well). While washing it, scrub
the cylinder bores with a soft bristle brush and thoroughly clean all of the oil
passages. Completely dry the engine and spray the entire assembly down with an
anti-rust solution such as WD-40® or similar product. Take a clean lint-free rag
and wipe up any excess anti-rust solution from the bores, bearing saddles, etc.
Repeat the final cleaning process on the crankshaft. Replace any freeze or oil
galley plugs which were removed during disassembly.

### Crankshaft

1. Remove the main bearing inserts from the block and bearing caps.

2. If the crankshaft main bearing journals have been refinished to a definite
undersize, install the correct undersize bearing. Be sure that the bearing
inserts and bearing bores are clean. Foreign material under inserts will distort
bearing and cause failure.

3. Place the upper main bearing inserts in bores with tang in slot.

4. Install the lower main bearing inserts in bearing caps.

5. Clean the mating surfaces of block and rear main bearing cap.

6. Carefully lower the crankshaft into place. Be careful not to damage bearing
surfaces.

7. Check the clearance of each main bearing by using the following procedure:

NOTE: The oil holes in the bearing inserts must be aligned with the oil holes in
the cylinder block.


    A.  Place a piece of Plastigage® or its equivalent, on bearing surface
    across full width of bearing cap and about 1 ⁄ 4 in. off center.  Fig. 1:
    Apply a strip of gauging material to the bearing journal, then install and
    torque the cap


    B.  Install cap and tighten bolts to specifications. Do not turn crankshaft
    while Plastigage® is in place.


    C.  Remove the cap. Using the supplied Plastigage® scale, check width of
    Plastigage® at widest point to get maximum clearance. Difference between
    readings is taper of journal.  Fig. 2: After the cap is removed again, use
    the scale supplied with the gauging material to check the clearance


    D.  If clearance exceeds specified limits, try a 0.001 in. or 0.002 in.
    undersize bearing in combination with the standard bearing. Bearing
    clearance must be within specified limits. If standard and 0.002 in.
    undersize bearing does not bring clearance within desired limits, refinish
    crankshaft journal, then install undersize bearings.

8. After the bearings have been fitted, apply a light coat of engine oil to the
journals and bearings. Install the rear main bearing cap. Install all bearing
caps except the thrust bearing cap. Be sure that main bearing caps are installed
in original locations. Tighten the bearing cap bolts to specifications.

9. Install the thrust bearing cap with bolts finger-tight.

10. Pry the crankshaft forward against the thrust surface of upper half of
bearing.

11. Hold the crankshaft forward and pry the thrust bearing cap to the rear. This
aligns the thrust surfaces of both halves of the bearing.

12. Retain the forward pressure on the crankshaft. Tighten the cap bolts to
specifications.

13. Measure the crankshaft end-play as follows:

Fig. 3: A dial gauge may be used to check crankshaft endplay


    A.  Mount a dial gauge to the engine block and position the tip of the gauge
    to read from the crankshaft end.


    B.  Carefully pry the crankshaft toward the rear of the engine and hold it
    there while you zero the gauge.  Fig. 4: Carefully pry the crankshaft back
    and forth while reading the dial gauge for end-play

14. 


    C.  Carefully pry the crankshaft toward the front of the engine and read the
    gauge.


    D.  Confirm that the reading is within specifications. If not, install a new
    thrust bearing and repeat the procedure. If the reading is still out of
    specifications with a new bearing, have a machine shop inspect the thrust
    surfaces of the crankshaft, and if possible, repair it.

Rotate the crankshaft so as to position the first rod journal to the bottom of
its stroke.

### Pistons and Connecting Rods

1. Before installing the piston/connecting rod assembly, oil the pistons, piston
rings and the cylinder walls with light engine oil. Install connecting rod bolt
protectors or rubber hose onto the connecting rod bolts/studs. Also perform the
following:

    A.  Select the proper ring set for the size cylinder bore.


    B.  Position the ring in the bore in which it is going to be used.


    C.  Push the ring down into the bore area where normal ring wear is not
    encountered.


    D.  Use the head of the piston to position the ring in the bore so that the
    ring is square with the cylinder wall. Use caution to avoid damage to the
    ring or cylinder bore.


    E.  Measure the gap between the ends of the ring with a feeler gauge. Ring
    gap in a worn cylinder is normally greater than specification. If the ring
    gap is greater than the specified limits, try an oversize ring set.  Fig. 5:
    Checking the piston ring-to-ring groove side clearance using the ring and a
    feeler gauge


    F.  Check the ring side clearance of the compression rings with a feeler
    gauge inserted between the ring and its lower land according to
    specification. The gauge should slide freely around the entire ring
    circumference without binding. Any wear that occurs will form a step at the
    inner portion of the lower land. If the lower lands have high steps, the
    piston should be replaced.  Fig. 6: The notch on the side of the bearing cap
    matches the tang on the bearing insert

2. Unless new pistons are installed, be sure to install the pistons in the
cylinders from which they were removed. The numbers on the connecting rod and
bearing cap must be on the same side when installed in the cylinder bore. If a
connecting rod is ever transposed from one engine or cylinder to another, new
bearings should be fitted and the connecting rod should be numbered to
correspond with the new cylinder number. The notch on the piston head goes
toward the front of the engine.

3. Install all of the rod bearing inserts into the rods and caps.

Fig. 7: Most rings are marked to show which side of the ring should face up when
installed to the piston

4. Install the rings to the pistons. Install the oil control ring first, then
the second compression ring and finally the top compression ring. Use a piston
ring expander tool to aid in installation and to help reduce the chance of
breakage.

Fig. 8: Install the piston and rod assembly into the block using a ring
compressor and the handle of a hammer

5. Make sure the ring gaps are properly spaced around the circumference of the
piston. Fit a piston ring compressor around the piston and slide the piston and
connecting rod assembly down into the cylinder bore, pushing it in with the
wooden hammer handle. Push the piston down until it is only slightly below the
top of the cylinder bore. Guide the connecting rod onto the crankshaft bearing
journal carefully, to avoid damaging the crankshaft.

6. Check the bearing clearance of all the rod bearings, fitting them to the
crankshaft bearing journals. Follow the procedure in the crankshaft installation
above.

7. After the bearings have been fitted, apply a light coating of assembly oil to
the journals and bearings.

8. Turn the crankshaft until the appropriate bearing journal is at the bottom of
its stroke, then push the piston assembly all the way down until the connecting
rod bearing seats on the crankshaft journal. Be careful not to allow the bearing
cap screws to strike the crankshaft bearing journals and damage them.

9. After the piston and connecting rod assemblies have been installed, check the
connecting rod side clearance on each crankshaft journal.

10. Prime and install the oil pump and the oil pump intake tube.

11. Install the auxiliary/balance shaft(s)/assembly(ies).

### OHC Engines

### CYLINDER HEAD(S)

1. Install the cylinder head(s) using new gaskets.

2. Install the timing sprockets/gears and the belt/chain assemblies.

### Engine Covers and Components

Install the timing cover(s) and oil pan. Refer to your notes and drawings made
prior to disassembly and install all of the components that were removed.
Install the engine into the vehicle.


## Engine Disassembly Instructions for a 1993 Volvo 940

The engine disassembly instructions following assume that you have the engine
mounted on an engine stand. If not, it is easiest to disassemble the engine on a
bench or the floor with it resting on the bell housing or transmission mounting
surface. You must be able to access the connecting rod fasteners and turn the
crankshaft during disassembly. Also, all engine covers (timing, front, side, oil
pan, whatever) should have already been removed. Engines which are seized or
locked up may not be able to be completely disassembled, and a core (salvage
yard) engine should be purchased.

### OHC Engines

If not done during the cylinder head removal, remove the timing chain/belt
and/or gear/sprocket assembly. Remove the oil pick-up and pump assembly and, if
necessary, the pump drive.  If equipped, remove any balance or auxiliary shafts.
If necessary, remove the cylinder ridge from the top of the bore. See the
cylinder ridge removal procedure earlier in this section.

### All Engines

Rotate the engine over so that the crankshaft is exposed. Use a number punch or
scribe and mark each connecting rod with its respective cylinder number. The
cylinder closest to the front of the engine is always No. 1. However, depending
on the engine placement, the front of the engine could either be the flywheel or
damper/pulley end. Generally the front of the engine faces the front of the
vehicle. Use a number punch or scribe and also mark the main bearing caps from
front to rear with the frontmost cap being No. 1 (if there are five caps, mark
them 1 through 5, front to rear).

Fig. 1: Place rubber hose over the connecting rod studs to protect the
crankshaft and cylinder bores from damage

WARNING Take special care when pushing the connecting rod up from the crankshaft
because the sharp threads of the rod bolts/studs will score the crankshaft
journal. Insure that special plastic caps are installed over them, or cut two
pieces of rubber hose to do the same.

Fig. 2: Carefully tap the piston out of the bore using a wooden dowel

Again, rotate the engine, this time to position the number one cylinder bore
(head surface) up. Turn the crankshaft until the number one piston is at the
bottom of its travel, this should allow the maximum access to its connecting
rod. Remove the number one connecting rods fasteners and cap and place two
lengths of rubber hose over the rod bolts/studs to protect the crankshaft from
damage. Using a sturdy wooden dowel and a hammer, push the connecting rod up
about 1 in. (25mm) from the crankshaft and remove the upper bearing insert.
Continue pushing or tapping the connecting rod up until the piston rings are out
of the cylinder bore. Remove the piston and rod by hand, put the upper half of
the bearing insert back into the rod, install the cap with its bearing insert
installed, and hand-tighten the cap fasteners. If the parts are kept in order in
this manner, they will not get lost and you will be able to tell which bearings
came form what cylinder if any problems are discovered and diagnosis is
necessary. Remove all the other piston assemblies in the same manner. On V-style
engines, remove all of the pistons from one bank, then reposition the engine
with the other cylinder bank head surface up, and remove that banks piston
assemblies.  The only remaining component in the engine block should now be the
crankshaft. Loosen the main bearing caps evenly until the fasteners can be
turned by hand, then remove them and the caps. Remove the crankshaft from the
engine block. Thoroughly clean all of the components.


## Engine Reconditioning and Cylinder Ridge Removal

A thorough overhaul or rebuild of an engine block would include replacing the
pistons, rings, bearings, timing belt/chain assembly and oil pump. For OHV
engines also include a new camshaft and lifters. The block would then have the
cylinders bored and honed oversize (or if using removable cylinder sleeves, new
sleeves installed) and the crankshaft would be cut undersize to provide new
wearing surfaces and perfect clearances. However, your particular engine may not
have everything worn out. What if only the piston rings have worn out and the
clearances on everything else are still within factory specifications? Well, you
could just replace the rings and put it back together, but this would be a very
rare example. Chances are, if one component in your engine is worn, other
components are sure to follow, and soon. At the very least, you should always
replace the rings, bearings and oil pump. This is what is commonly called a
"freshen up".

### Cylinder Ridge Removal

Because the top piston ring does not travel to the very top of the cylinder, a
ridge is built up between the end of the travel and the top of the cylinder
bore.  Pushing the piston and connecting rod assembly past the ridge can be
difficult, and damage to the piston ring lands could occur. If the ridge is not
removed before installing a new piston or not removed at all, piston ring
breakage and piston damage may occur.

NOTE: It is always recommended that you remove any cylinder ridges before
removing the piston and connecting rod assemblies. If you know that new pistons
are going to be installed and the engine block will be bored oversize, you may
be able to forego this step. However, some ridges may actually prevent the
assemblies from being removed, necessitating its removal.

There are several different types of ridge reamers on the market, none of which
are inexpensive. Unless a great deal of engine rebuilding is anticipated, borrow
or rent a reamer.
1. Turn the crankshaft until the piston is at the bottom of its travel.

2. Cover the head of the piston with a rag.

3. Follow the tool manufacturers instructions and cut away the ridge, exercising
extreme care to avoid cutting too deeply.

4. Remove the ridge reamer, the rag and as many of the cuttings as possible.
Continue until all of the cylinder ridges have been removed.


## Inspection and Analysis of Engine Components for Wear and Damage

Now that the engine block and all of its components are clean, its time to
inspect them for wear and/or damage. To accurately inspect them, you will need
some specialized tools:

- Two or three separate micrometers to measure the pistons and crankshaft
  journals
- A dial indicator
- Telescoping gauges for the cylinder bores
- A rod alignment fixture to check for bent connecting rods

If you do not have access to the proper tools, you may want to bring the
components to a shop that does.  Generally, you shouldn't expect cracks in the
engine block or its components unless it was known to leak, consume or mix
engine fluids, it was severely overheated, or there was evidence of bad bearings
and/or crankshaft damage. A visual inspection should be performed on all of the
components, but just because you don't see a crack does not mean it is not
there. Some more reliable methods for inspecting for cracks include Magnaflux® ,
a magnetic process or Zyglo® , a dye penetrant. Magnaflux® is used only on
ferrous metal (cast iron). Zyglo® uses a spray on fluorescent mixture along with
a black light to reveal the cracks. It is strongly recommended to have your
engine block checked professionally for cracks, especially if the engine was
known to have overheated and/or leaked or consumed coolant. Contact a local shop
for availability and pricing of these services.

### Engine Block

### ENGINE BLOCK BEARING ALIGNMENT Remove the main bearing caps and, if still
installed, the main bearing inserts. Inspect all of the main bearing saddles and
caps for damage, burrs or high spots. If damage is found, and it is caused from
a spun main bearing, the block will need to be align-bored or, if severe enough,
replacement. Any burrs or high spots should be carefully removed with a metal
file.

Place a straightedge on the bearing saddles, in the engine block, along the
centerline of the crankshaft. If any clearance exists between the straightedge
and the saddles, the block must be align-bored.  Align-boring consists of
machining the main bearing saddles and caps by means of a flycutter that runs
through the bearing saddles.

### DECK FLATNESS The top of the engine block where the cylinder head mounts is
called the deck. Insure that the deck surface is clean of dirt, carbon deposits
and old gasket material. Place a straightedge across the surface of the deck
along its centerline and, using feeler gauges, check the clearance along several
points. Repeat the checking procedure with the straightedge placed along both
diagonals of the deck surface. If the reading exceeds 0.003 in. (0.076mm) within
a 6.0 in. (15.2cm) span, or 0.006 in. (0.152mm) over the total length of the
deck, it must be machined.

### CYLINDER BORES The cylinder bores house the pistons and are slightly larger
than the pistons themselves. A common piston-to-bore clearance is 0.0015–0.0025
in. (0.0381–0.0635mm). Inspect and measure the cylinder bores. The bore should
be checked for out-of-roundness, taper and size. The results of this inspection
will determine whether the cylinder can be used in its existing size and
condition, or a rebore to the next oversize is required (or in the case of
removable sleeves, have replacements installed).

Fig. 1: Use a telescoping gauge to measure the cylinder bore diameter — take
several readings within the same bore

The amount of cylinder wall wear is always greater at the top of the cylinder
than at the bottom. This wear is known as taper. Any cylinder that has a taper
of 0.0012 in. (0.305mm) or more, must be rebored. Measurements are taken at a
number of positions in each cylinder: at the top, middle and bottom and at two
points at each position; that is, at a point 90 degrees from the crankshaft
centerline, as well as a point parallel to the crankshaft centerline. The
measurements are made with either a special dial indicator or a telescopic gauge
and micrometer. If the necessary precision tools to check the bore are not
available, take the block to a machine shop and have them mike it. Also if you
don't have the tools to check the cylinder bores, chances are you will not have
the necessary devices to check the pistons, connecting rods and crankshaft. Take
these components with you and save yourself an extra trip.

For our procedures, we will use a telescopic gauge and a micrometer. You will
need one of each, with a measuring range which covers your cylinder bore size.

1. Position the telescopic gauge in the cylinder bore, loosen the gauges lock
and allow it to expand.

NOTE: Your first two readings will be at the top of the cylinder bore, then
proceed to the middle and finally the bottom, making a total of six
measurements.

2. Hold the gauge square in the bore, 90 degrees from the crankshaft centerline,
and gently tighten the lock. Tilt the gauge back to remove it from the bore.

3. Measure the gauge with the micrometer and record the reading.

4. Again, hold the gauge square in the bore, this time parallel to the
crankshaft centerline, and gently tighten the lock. Again, you will tilt the
gauge back to remove it from the bore.

5. Measure the gauge with the micrometer and record this reading. The difference
between these two readings is the out-of-round measurement of the cylinder.

6. Repeat Steps 1 through 5, each time going to the next lower position, until
you reach the bottom of the cylinder. Then go to the next cylinder, and continue
until all of the cylinders have been measured.

The difference between these measurements will tell you all about the wear in
your cylinders. The measurements which were taken 90 degrees from the crankshaft
centerline will always reflect the most wear. That is because at this position
is where the engine power presses the piston against the cylinder bore the
hardest. This is known as thrust wear. Take your top, 90 degree measurement and
compare it to your bottom, 90 degree measurement. The difference between them is
the taper. When you measure your pistons, you will compare these readings to
your piston sizes and determine piston-to-wall clearance.

### Crankshaft Inspect the crankshaft for visible signs of wear or damage. All
of the journals should be perfectly round and smooth. Slight scores are normal
for a used crankshaft, but you should hardly feel them with your fingernail.
When measuring the crankshaft with a micrometer, you will take readings at the
front and rear of each journal, then turn the micrometer 90 degrees and take two
more readings, front and rear. The difference between the front-to-rear readings
is the journal taper and the first-to-90 degree reading is the out-of-round
measurement. Generally, there should be no taper or out-of-roundness found,
however, up to 0.0005 in. (0.0127mm) for either can be overlooked. Also, the
readings should fall within the factory specifications for journal diameters.
If the crankshaft journals fall within specifications, it is recommended that it
be polished before being returned to service. Polishing the crankshaft insures
that any minor burrs or high spots are smoothed, thereby reducing the chance of
scoring the new bearings.

### Pistons and Connecting Rods

### PISTONS The piston should be visually inspected for any signs of cracking or
burning (caused by hot spots or detonation), and scuffing or excessive wear on
the skirts. The wrist pin attaches the piston to the connecting rod. The piston
should move freely on the wrist pin, both sliding and pivoting. Grasp the
connecting rod securely, or mount it in a vise, and try to rock the piston back
and forth along the centerline of the wrist pin. There should not be any
excessive play evident between the piston and the pin. If there are C-clips
retaining the pin in the piston then you have wrist pin bushings in the rods.
There should not be any excessive play between the wrist pin and the rod
bushing. Normal clearance for the wrist pin is approx. 0.001–0.002 in.
(0.025–0.051mm).

Fig. 2: Measure the piston's outer diameter, perpendicular to the wrist pin,
with a micrometer

Use a micrometer and measure the diameter of the piston, perpendicular to the
wrist pin, on the skirt. Compare the reading to its original cylinder
measurement obtained earlier. The difference between the two readings is the
piston-to-wall clearance. If the clearance is within specifications, the piston
may be used as is. If the piston is out of specification, but the bore is not,
you will need a new piston. If both are out of specification, you will need the
cylinder rebored and oversize pistons installed. Generally if two or more
pistons/bores are out of specification, it is best to rebore the entire block
and purchase a complete set of oversize pistons.

### CONNECTING ROD

You should have the connecting rod checked for straightness at a machine shop.
If the connecting rod is bent, it will unevenly wear the bearing and piston, as
well as place greater stress on these components. Any bent or twisted connecting
rods must be replaced. If the rods are straight and the wrist pin clearance is
within specifications, then only the bearing end of the rod need be checked.
Place the connecting rod into a vice, with the bearing inserts in place, install
the cap to the rod and torque the fasteners to specifications. Use a telescoping
gauge and carefully measure the inside diameter of the bearings. Compare this
reading to the rods original crankshaft journal diameter measurement. The
difference is the oil clearance. If the oil clearance is not within
specifications, install new bearings in the rod and take another measurement. If
the clearance is still out of specifications, and the crankshaft is not, the rod
will need to be reconditioned by a machine shop.

NOTE: You can also use Plastigage® to check the bearing clearances. The
assembling section has complete instructions on its use.

### Camshaft

Inspect the camshaft and lifters/followers as described earlier in this section.

### Bearings

All of the engine bearings should be visually inspected for wear and/or damage.
The bearing should look evenly worn all around with no deep scores or pits. If
the bearing is severely worn, scored, pitted or heat blued, then the bearing,
and the components that use it, should be brought to a machine shop for
inspection. Full-circle bearings (used on most camshafts, auxiliary shafts,
balance shafts, etc.) require specialized tools for removal and installation,
and should be brought to a machine shop for service.

### Oil Pump

NOTE: The oil pump is responsible for providing constant lubrication to the
whole engine and so it is recommended that a new oil pump be installed when
rebuilding the engine.

Completely disassemble the oil pump and thoroughly clean all of the components.
Inspect the oil pump gears and housing for wear and/or damage. Insure that the
pressure relief valve operates properly and there is no binding or sticking due
to varnish or debris. If all of the parts are in proper working condition,
lubricate the gears and relief valve, and assemble the pump.


## Engine Block Refinishing and Piston Installation

Almost all engine block refinishing must be performed by a machine shop. If the
cylinders are not to be rebored, then the cylinder glaze can be removed with a
ball hone. When removing cylinder glaze with a ball hone, use a light or
penetrating type oil to lubricate the hone. Do not allow the hone to run dry as
this may cause excessive scoring of the cylinder bores and wear on the hone. If
new pistons are required, they will need to be installed to the connecting rods.
This should be performed by a machine shop as the pistons must be installed in
the correct relationship to the rod or engine damage can occur.

Fig. 1: Use a ball type cylinder hone to remove any glaze and provide a new
surface for seating the piston rings

### Pistons and Connecting Rods 

Only pistons with the wrist pin retained by C-clips are serviceable by the
home-mechanic. Press fit pistons require special presses and/or heaters to
remove/install the connecting rod and should only be performed by a machine
shop.  All pistons will have a mark indicating the direction to the front of the
engine and the must be installed into the engine in that manner. Usually it is a
notch or arrow on the top of the piston, or it may be the letter F cast or
stamped into the piston.

Fig. 2: Most pistons are marked to indicate positioning in the engine (usually a
mark means the side facing the front)


## Engine Overhaul and Rebuilding Guidelines

Most engine overhaul procedures are fairly standard. In addition to specific
parts replacement procedures and specifications for your individual engine, this
section is also a guide to acceptable rebuilding procedures. Examples of
standard rebuilding practice are given and should be used along with specific
details concerning your particular engine.

Competent and accurate machine shop services will ensure maximum performance,
reliability and engine life. In most instances it is more profitable for the
do-it-yourself mechanic to remove, clean and inspect the component, buy the
necessary parts and deliver these to a shop for actual machine work.

Much of the assembly work (crankshaft, bearings, piston rods, and other
components) is well within the scope of the do-it-yourself mechanic's tools and
abilities. You will have to decide for yourself the depth of involvement you
desire in an engine repair or rebuild.


## Engine Cleaning and Inspection

Before the engine and its components are inspected, they must be thoroughly
cleaned. You will need to remove any engine varnish, oil sludge and/or carbon
deposits from all of the components to insure an accurate inspection. A crack in
the engine block or cylinder head can easily become overlooked if hidden by a
layer of sludge or carbon.

Fig. 1: Use a gasket scraper to remove the old gasket material from the mating
surfaces

Most of the cleaning process can be carried out with common hand tools and
readily available solvents or solutions. Carbon deposits can be chipped away
using a hammer and a hard wooden chisel. Old gasket material and varnish or
sludge can usually be removed using a scraper and/or cleaning solvent. Extremely
stubborn deposits may require the use of a power drill with a wire brush. If
using a wire brush, use extreme care around any critical machined surfaces (such
as the gasket surfaces, bearing saddles, cylinder bores, etc.). 

USE OF A WIRE BRUSH IS NOT RECOMMENDED ON ANY ALUMINUM COMPONENTS. 

Always follow any safety recommendations given by the manufacturer of the tool
and/or solvent. You should always wear eye protection during any cleaning
process involving scraping, chipping or spraying of solvents.  An alternative to
the mess and hassle of cleaning the parts yourself is to drop them off at a
local garage or machine shop. They will, more than likely, have the necessary
equipment to properly clean all of the parts for a nominal fee.

CAUTION Always wear eye protection during any cleaning process involving
scraping, chipping or spraying of solvents.

Fig. 2: Use a ring expander tool to remove the piston rings

Remove any oil galley plugs, freeze plugs and/or pressed-in bearings and
carefully wash and degrease all of the engine components including the fasteners
and bolts. Small parts such as the valves, springs, etc., should be placed in a
metal basket and allowed to soak. Use pipe cleaner type brushes, and clean all
passageways in the components. Use a ring expander and remove the rings from the
pistons. Clean the piston ring grooves with a special tool or a piece of broken
ring. Scrape the carbon off of the top of the piston. You should never use a
wire brush on the pistons. After preparing all of the piston assemblies in this
manner, wash and degrease them again.

Fig. 3: Clean the piston ring grooves using a ring groove cleaner tool, or . . .

Fig. 4: . . . use a piece of an old ring to clean the grooves. Be careful, the
ring can be quite sharp

WARNING Use extreme care when cleaning around the cylinder head valve seats. A
mistake or slip may cost you a new seat.  When cleaning the cylinder head,
remove carbon from the combustion chamber with the valves installed. This will
avoid damaging the valve seats.


## Precautions for Handling Aluminum Parts in Engine Reconditioning

Aluminum has become extremely popular for use in engines, due to its low weight.
Observe the following precautions when handling aluminum parts: Never hot tank
aluminum parts (the caustic hot tank solution will eat the aluminum.  Remove all
aluminum parts (identification tag, etc.) from engine parts prior to the
tanking.  Always coat threads lightly with engine oil or anti-seize compounds
before installation, to prevent seizure.  Never overtighten bolts or spark plugs
especially in aluminum threads.  When assembling the engine, any parts that will
be exposed to frictional contact must be prelubed to provide lubrication at
initial start-up. Any product specifically formulated for this purpose can be
used, but engine oil is not recommended as a prelube in most cases.  When
semi-permanent (locked, but removable) installation of bolts or nuts is desired,
threads should be cleaned and coated with Loctite(r) or another similar,
commercial non-hardening sealant.


## Thread Repair Methods for Damaged Bolt Holes

Fig. 1: Damaged bolt hole threads can be replaced with thread repair inserts

Fig. 2: Standard thread repair insert (left), and spark plug thread insert

Fig. 3: Drill out the damaged threads with the specified size bit. Be sure to
drill completely through the hole or to the bottom of a blind hole

Fig. 4: Using the kit, tap the hole in order to receive the thread insert. Keep
the tap well oiled and back it out frequently to avoid clogging the threads

Fig. 5: Screw the insert onto the installer tool until the tang engages the
slot. Thread the insert into the hole until it is 1 ⁄ 1 ⁄ turn below the top
surface, then remove the tool and 4– 2 break off the tang using a punch

Several methods of repairing damaged threads are available. Heli-Coil(r) (shown
here), Keenserts(r) and Microdot(r) are among the most widely used. All involve
basically the same principle — drilling out stripped threads, tapping the hole
and installing a prewound insert — making welding, plugging and oversize
fasteners unnecessary.

Two types of thread repair inserts are usually supplied: a standard type for
most inch coarse, inch fine, metric course and metric fine thread sizes and a
spark lug type to fit most spark plug port sizes. Consult the individual tool
manufacturer's catalog to determine exact applications. Typical thread repair
kits will contain a selection of prewound threaded inserts, a tap (corresponding
to the outside diameter threads of the insert) and an installation tool. Spark
plug inserts usually differ because they require a tap equipped with pilot
threads and a combined reamer/tap section. Most manufacturers also supply
blister-packed thread repair inserts separately in addition to a master kit
containing a variety of taps and inserts plus installation tools.

Before attempting to repair a threaded hole, remove any snapped, broken or
damaged bolts or studs. Penetrating oil can be used to free frozen threads. The
offending item can usually be removed with locking pliers or using a screw/stud
extractor. After the hole is clear, the thread can be repaired, as shown in the
series of accompanying illustrations and in the kit manufacturer's instructions.


## Required Tools for Engine Overhaul and Parts Replacement

The tools required for an engine overhaul or parts replacement will depend on
the depth of your involvement. With a few exceptions, they will be the tools
found in a mechanic's tool kit (see Section 1 of this manual). More in-depth
work will require some or all of the following:

- A dial indicator (reading in thousandths) mounted on a universal base
- Micrometers and telescope gauges
- Jaw and screw-type pullers
- Scraper
- Valve spring compressor
- Ring groove cleaner
- Piston ring expander and compressor
- Ridge reamer
- Cylinder hone or glaze breaker
- Plastigage®
- Engine stand

The use of most of these tools is illustrated in this section. Many can be
rented for a one-time use from a local parts jobber or tool supply house
specializing in automotive work.

Occasionally, the use of special tools is called for. See the information on
Special Tools and the Safety Notice in the front of this book before
substituting another tool.


## Engine Disassembly and Preparation

To properly rebuild an engine, you must first remove it from the vehicle, then
disassemble and diagnose it. Ideally you should place your engine on an engine
stand. This affords you the best access to the engine components. Follow the
manufacturer's directions for using the stand with your particular engine.
Remove the flywheel or flexplate before installing the engine to the stand.

Now that you have the engine on a stand, and assuming that you have drained the
oil and coolant from the engine, its time to strip it of all but the necessary
components. Before you start disassembling the engine, you may want to take a
moment to draw some pictures, or fabricate some labels or containers to mark the
locations of various components and the bolts and/or studs which fasten them.
Modern day engines use a lot of little brackets and clips which hold wiring
harnesses and such, and these holders are often mounted on studs and/or bolts
that can be easily mixed up. The manufacturer spent a lot of time and money
designing your vehicle, and they wouldn't have wasted any of it by haphazardly
placing brackets, clips or fasteners on the vehicle. If its present when you
disassemble it, put it back when you assemble, you will regret not remembering
that little bracket which holds a wire harness out of the path of a rotating
part.

You should begin by unbolting any accessories still attached to the engine, such
as the water pump, power steering pump, alternator, etc. Then, unfasten any
manifolds (intake or exhaust) which were not removed during the engine removal
procedure. Finally, remove any covers remaining on the engine such as the rocker
arm, front or timing cover and oil pan. Some front covers may require the
vibration damper and/or crank pulley to be removed beforehand. The idea is to
reduce the engine to the bare necessities (cylinder head(s), valve train, engine
block, crankshaft, pistons and connecting rods), plus any other 'in block'
components such as oil pumps, balance shafts and auxiliary shafts.

Finally, remove the cylinder head(s) from the engine block and carefully place
on a bench. Disassembly instructions for each component follow later in this
section.


## Engine Break-In and Maintenance

Make the first miles on the new engine, easy ones. Vary the speed but do not
accelerate hard. Most importantly, do not lug the engine, and avoid sustained
high speeds until at least 100 miles (161 km). Check the engine oil and coolant
levels frequently. Expect the engine to use a little oil until the rings seat.
Change the oil and filter at 500 miles (805 km), 1500 miles (2415 km), then
every 3000 miles (4830 km) past that.


## Maintaining Your Reconditioned Engine

Now that you have just gone through all of that hard work, keep yourself from
doing it all over again by thoroughly maintaining it. Not that you may not have
maintained it before, heck you could have had one to two hundred thousand miles
on it before doing this. However, you may have bought the vehicle used, and the
previous owner did not keep up on maintenance. Which is why you just went
through all of that hard work. See?


## Reinstall Engine

Now that the engine is installed and every wire and hose is properly connected,
go back and double check that all coolant and vacuum hoses are connected. Check
that you oil drain plug is installed and properly tightened. If not already
done, install a new oil filter onto the engine. Fill the crankcase with the
proper amount and grade of engine oil. Fill the cooling system with a 50/50
mixture of coolant/water.

1. Connect the vehicle battery.

2. Start the engine. Keep your eye on your oil pressure indicator; if it does
   not indicate oil pressure within 10 seconds of starting, turn the vehicle
   off.

WARNING Damage to the engine can result if it is allowed to run with no oil
pressure. Check the engine oil level to make sure that it is full. Check for any
leaks and if found, repair the leaks before continuing. If there is still no
indication of oil pressure, you may need to prime the system.

3. Confirm that there are no fluid leaks (oil or other).

4. Allow the engine to reach normal operating temperature (the upper radiator
   hose will be hot to the touch).

5. If necessary, set the ignition timing.

6. Install any remaining components such as the air cleaner (if removed for
   ignition timing) or body panels which were removed.
