# FUEL SYSTEM


## Fuel System Diagnosis and Testing

When there is a problem starting or driving a vehicle, two of the most important
checks involve the ignition and the fuel systems. The questions most mechanics
attempt to answer first, `is there spark?'' and `is there fuel?'' will often
lead to solving most basic problems. For ignition system diagnosis and testing,
please refer to the information on engine electrical components and ignition
systems found earlier in this manual. If the ignition system checks out (there
is spark), then you must determine if the fuel system is operating properly (is
there fuel?).


## Fuel System Components and Operation

LH denotes that this is a "hot wire" system. The system is fully electronically
controlled and incorporate a number of sensors, whose signals are processed by a
control unit. There are several different versions of the LH system, including
the 2.2, 2.4, 3.1 and 3.2. The Bosch LH-Jetronic system is used in combination
with the EZK ignition system and the turbocharged control system, where
applicable. The LH fuel system is characterized by the following:

- Measurement of intake air through the air mass meter of the hot wire type
- Use of a separate cold start valve that supplies extra fuel, at or below 60°F
  (16°C)
- Knock controlled fuel enrichment system
- Engine speed taken from an inductive transmitter on the flywheel
- Lambda probe (oxygen sensor) providing oxygen content of the exhaust gases
- EVAP system to minimize evaporation from the fuel tank
- Three-way catalytic converter

Several sensors feed the control unit information to precisely control fuel
injection. To accomplish this, the control unit evaluates: exhaust gas oxygen
content from the oxygen sensor (Lambda-sond), engine RPM and crankshaft position
information from the ignition system control unit (if information is not
received, the fuel system control unit will not function), engine temperature
from the coolant temperature sensor, engine load information from the air mass
meter, information from the throttle switch, which indicates if the throttle is
closed or wide open, electrical system voltage from the battery current and
signals from the A/C switch and clutch, indicating whether they are operating.


## Bosch Motronic Fuel Injection System and Functions

The Bosch Motronic fuel injection system is equipped with a powerful control
unit that controls ignition and fuel injection functions by means of individual
ignition coils and injectors. There are several different Motronic fuel
injection versions. These include the 1.8, 4.3, and 4.4.

In addition to controlling the ignition and fuel injection functions, Motronic
also:

- Determines whether the A/C compressor may be switched on
- Reduces the engine torque in response to a signal from the automatic
  transmission control unit, to insure smooth engagement of the different gears,
  and also supplies the transmission control unit with information on engine
  running conditions for computing gear changes
- Controls the operation of the radiator fan

The control unit is provided with adaptive Lambda control and idling control
functions, as well as timing retardation function, to eliminate knock. The
service requirement is minimal, since neither the carbon monoxide level nor the
idling speed require adjustment.


## Fuel Line Connections and Removal Procedures

Most Volvo fuel lines use threaded-type connections. These connections are
removed using the appropriate size flare-nut wrenches. Use one wrench to hold
the male fitting, while the other wrench turns the female fitting until the
lines are separated.

Some connections do have quick-connect fittings. The fuel filter has a
quick-connect fitting; it is removed using a 17mm wrench to depress the tab and
remove the line. Other quick-connect fittings have clips which must be removed
before the line can be separated. NOTE: For additional information on Fuel
Filter removal and installation, refer to Section 1 of this manual.


## Fuel System Pressure Relief and Fuel Rail Assembly

### 2.3L 4-Cylinder and 2.8L 6-Cylinder Engines

1. Properly relieve the fuel system pressure.

2. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

3. Label and remove electrical connectors from the injectors.

4. Remove the fuel lines from the fuel rail.

5. Remove the retaining bolts from the fuel rail.

6. Remove the fuel rail and injectors as an assembly.

7. Lubricate the O-rings on the injectors with petroleum jelly or equivalent.

8. Install the fuel rail assembly. Ensure that the O-rings seat properly.

9. Tighten the fuel rail retaining bolts.

10. Install the fuel lines on the fuel rail.

11. Install the injector connectors.

12. Connect the negative battery cable.

13. Start the vehicle and check for leaks.

NOTE: On the 2.8L engine, remove one fuel rail at a time.

To install:

Fig. 1: Exploded view of the 2.3L 4-cylinder fuel rail and pressure regulator
assembly

Fig. 2: Exploded view of the 2.8L 6-cylinder fuel rail and pressure regulator
assembly



## Fuel System Component Removal and Installation

### 2.3L 4-Cylinder and 2.8L 6-Cylinder Engines

1. Relieve the fuel system pressure.

2. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

3. Disconnect the fuel lines, electrical connectors and vacuum hose from the
injection manifold and pressure regulator.

4. Unbolt the pressure regulator from the fuel rail bracket.

5. Remove the injector cover plate, if equipped.

6. Remove the fuel injection manifold retaining bolts. Remove the fuel injection
manifold and injectors as one unit.

7. Secure the injection manifold in a suitable holding fixture and remove the
fuel injectors.

8. Check the fuel injector O-rings, and replace if necessary.

9. Coat the O-rings with petroleum jelly and install the fuel injectors to the
injection manifold.

To install:

10. Install the fuel injection manifold and fuel injectors as one unit.

11. Install and tighten the retaining bolts.

12. Install the injector cover plate, if equipped.

13. Connect the pressure regulator to the fuel injection manifold and then
attach to the bracket.

14. Connect the vacuum hose, fuel lines and electrical connectors.

15. Connect the negative battery cable.

16. Start the vehicle and check for leaks.



## Testing Fuel Injector Operation

The easiest way to test the operation of the fuel injectors is to listen for a
clicking sound coming from the injectors while the engine is running. This is
accomplished using a mechanic's stethoscope, or a long screwdriver. Place the
end of the stethoscope or the screwdriver (tip end, not handle) onto the body of
the injector. Place the ear pieces of the stethoscope in your ears, or if using
a screwdriver, place your ear on top of the handle. An audible clicking noise
should be heard; this is the solenoid operating. If the injector makes this
noise, the injector driver circuit and computer are operating as designed.
Continue testing all the injectors this way.

CAUTION Be extremely careful while working on an operating engine, make sure you
have no dangling jewelry, extremely loose clothes, power tool cords or other
items that might get caught in a moving part of the engine.

### All Injectors Clicking 

If all the injectors are clicking, but you have determined that the fuel system
is the cause of your driveability problem, continue diagnostics. Make sure that
you have checked fuel pump pressure as outlined earlier in this section. An easy
way to determine a weak or unproductive cylinder is a cylinder drop test. This
is accomplished by removing one spark plug wire at a time, and seeing which
cylinder causes the least difference in the idle. The one that causes the least
change is the weak cylinder.

If the injectors were all clicking and the ignition system is functioning
properly, remove the injector of the suspect cylinder and bench test it. This is
accomplished by checking for a spray pattern from the injector itself. Install a
fuel supply line to the injector (or rail if the injector is left attached to
the rail) and momentarily apply 12 volts DC and a ground to the injector itself;
a visible fuel spray should appear. If no spray is achieved, replace the
injector and check the running condition of the engine.

### One or More Injectors Are Not Clicking 

If one or more injectors are found to be not operating, testing the injector
driver circuit and computer can be accomplished using a "noid" light. First,
with the engine not running and the ignition key in the OFF position, remove the
connector from the injector you plan to test, then plug the "noid" light tool
into the injector connector. Start the engine and the "noid" light should flash,
signaling that the injector driver circuit is working. If the "noid" light
flashes, but the injector does not click when plugged in, replace the injector
and retest.

If the "noid" light does not flash, the injector driver circuit is faulty.
Disconnect the negative battery cable. Unplug the "noid" light from the injector
connector and also unplug the ECM. Check the harness between the appropriate
pins on the harness side of the ECM connector and the injector connector.
Resistance should be less than 5.0 ohms; if not, repair the circuit. If
resistance is within specifications, the injector driver inside the ECM is
faulty and replacement of the ECM will be necessary.


## Fuel System Pressure Relief and Regulator Removal

### 2.3L 4-Cylinder and 2.8L 6-Cylinder Engines

1. Properly relieve the fuel system pressure.

2. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

3. Remove the fuel lines from the pressure regulator.

4. Remove the vacuum line from the pressure regulator.

5. Remove the pressure regulator-to-bracket retaining bolts/nuts.

6. Install the pressure regulator in the bracket and tighten the retaining
bolts/nuts.

7. Install the vacuum line.

8. Install and tighten the fuel lines.

9. Connect the negative battery cable.

To install:

10. Start vehicle and check for leaks.

11. Ensure fuel pressure is correct.

12. Shut engine off and install the protective cover on the fuel rail.



## Testing Fuel Pressure and Reinstalling Fuel Pump Relay

1. Relieve the fuel pressure.

2. Connect a fuel pressure gauge 5011 or equivalent, between the fuel line and
distribution manifold or Schrader valve if equipped.

3. On 700 and 900 Series vehicles, remove the seat belt reminder, since this
makes the test more easily performed. It is located in the middle of the top row
in the fuse box.

4. Start the fuel pump (fuel pump relay removed) by connecting a jumper lead
between terminals 30 and 87/2 on the relay socket. Verify the pump operation by
removing the fuel cap and listening.

5. Note the gauge reading. The fuel pressure should be approximately 43.5 psi
(300 kPa).

6. Remove the jumper lead.

7. Relieve the fuel system pressure and remove the pressure gauge.

8. Re-install the fuel pump relay.

NOTE: Position a shop towel in place to catch any spilled fuel when the fuel
line connections are removed.

Fig. 1: The Schrader valve is located on the fuel rail — remove the protective
cap to test fuel pressure

Fig. 2: Install the gauge and adapters between the fuel feed line and fuel rail
on models without a Schrader valve


## Fuel System Pressure Relief and Fuel Tank Removal and Installation

### 2.3L 4-Cylinder and 2.8L 6-Cylinder Engines

1. Properly relieve the fuel system pressure.

2. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

3. Raise and support the vehicle safely.

4. Remove the fuel tank.

5. Loosen the lock ring at the top of the fuel tank and remove the sending unit
with the transfer pump attached. Note the direction of the float in the tank.

6. Remove the transfer pump from the sending unit.

7. Install the transfer pump on the sending unit.

8. Install the sending unit in the fuel tank and tighten the lock ring to
specification. Do not overtighten the lock ring as the plastic threads on some
fuel tanks are easily stripped.

9. Install the fuel tank in the vehicle.

To install:

10. Lower the vehicle.

11. Connect the negative battery cable.

12. Start the engine and check for leaks.

Fig. 1: Fuel pump assembly for the 2.3L 4-cylinder engine

Fig. 2: Fuel pump assembly for the 2.8L 6-cylinder engine



## Fuel System Safety Precautions

Safety is the most important factor when performing not only fuel system
maintenance, but any type of maintenance. Failure to conduct maintenance and
repairs in a safe manner may result in serious personal injury or death.
Maintenance and testing of the vehicle's fuel system components can be
accomplished safely and effectively by adhering to the following rules and
guidelines:

To avoid the possibility of fire and personal injury, always disconnect the
negative battery cable unless the repair or test procedure requires that battery
voltage be applied.

Always relieve the fuel system pressure prior to disconnecting any fuel system
component (injector, fuel rail, pressure regulator, etc.), fitting or fuel line
connection. Exercise extreme caution whenever relieving fuel system pressure to
avoid exposing skin, face and eyes to fuel spray. Please be advised that fuel
under pressure may penetrate the skin or any part of the body that it contacts.

Always place a shop towel or cloth around the fitting or connection prior to
loosening to absorb any excess fuel due to spillage. Ensure that all fuel
spillage (should it occur) is quickly removed from engine surfaces. Ensure that
all fuel soaked cloths or towels are deposited into a suitable waste container.

Always keep a dry chemical (Class B) fire extinguisher near the work area.

Do not allow fuel spray or fuel vapors to come into contact with a spark or open
flame.

Always use a backup wrench when loosening and tightening fuel line connection
fittings. This will prevent unnecessary stress and torsion to fuel line piping.

Always follow the proper torque specifications.

Always replace worn fuel fitting O-rings with new ones.  Do not substitute fuel
hose or equivalent, where fuel pipe is installed.

Whenever servicing the fuel system, always work in a well ventilated area.

Always keep fuel in a container specifically designed for fuel storage; also,
always properly seal fuel containers to avoid the possibility of fire or
explosion.



## Fuel Drainage and System Maintenance Procedure

1. Connect adapter 999-5484 or equivalent to fuel drainage unit 981-2270, 2273
or 2282 or suitable equivalent.

2. Remove the protective cap from the valve on the rear of the fuel rail.

3. Connect the adapter in the locked or closed position to the valve on the fuel
rail.

4. Start the fuel drainage unit.

5. Unlock or open the adapter valve.

6. Raise and safely support the vehicle.

7. Remove the fuel filter valve cap.

8. Connect vent hose 999 5480 or equivalent to the upstream valve of the fuel
filter.

9. Drain the system for approximately 2 minutes.

10. When the system is drained, disconnect vent hose and install the valve cap.

11. Lower the vehicle and disconnect the adapter from the fuel rail.

12. Install the valve cap.

13. Install the protective cap for the fuel rail and throttle pulley cover.  An
alternative method is to remove the fuel pump relay or fuse (if equipped) and
idle the engine until it stalls, thereby relieving the fuel pressure. Place the
ignition key in the OFF position and reinstall the fuel pump relay/fuse.

Fig. 1: Fuel pump relay location — 240 models

Fig. 2: Fuel pump relay location — 940 models

Fig. 3: Fuel pump fuse location — 960 models

Fig. 4: Connect the adapter to the pressure port, and drain the fuel on 2.3L and
2.4L 5-cylinder engines


## Fuel Pump and Sending Unit Assembly

On all vehicles, the fuel tank contains the fuel pump and sending unit assembly.


## Fuel System Disassembly and Fuel Tank Draining Procedure

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Properly relieve the fuel system pressure.

3. On the 2.9L 6-cylinder, as well as 2.3 and 2.4L 5-cylinder engine equipped
vehicles:

    A.  Tilt the rear seat forward and remove or fold back the trunk compartment
    carpet over the right-hand wheel well panel.


    B.  Disconnect the fuel pump electrical connections.


    C.  Detach the quick-connect couplers for the fuel delivery and return
    hoses.

NOTE: Take note of the color markings on the hoses; colored tape should identify
hose locations on the pump.

4. Raise and safely support the vehicle on jackstands.

5. Drain the fuel tank completely.

CAUTION When performing this procedure, always have a dry-chemical fire
extinguisher handy. Fuel vapors are extremely explosive.

6. In the trunk, remove the panels which cover the filler hose.

7. It may be necessary to remove the spare tire on some vehicles.

8. Roll back the carpet and remove the access panel cover.

9. Disconnect the fuel filler pipe connection. Remove the circlip retaining the
fuel filler pipe (if equipped).

10. Label and disconnect all fuel lines leading to the fuel tank.

11. Label and remove all electrical connectors at the fuel tank.

12. On some models, it may be necessary to remove the driveshaft.

13. Position a floor jack under the tank, using a large piece of wood as a
cushion between the fuel tank and the floor jack.

14. Raise the jack so that it just contacts the tank.

15. Remove any shields or protective covers on the tank.

16. Loosen and remove the tank retaining bolts.

17. Lower the jack slowly and inspect for any obstructions.

18. Install the protective shields and raise the fuel tank into position.

19. Install and tighten the attaching bolts.

20. Remove the floor jack.

21. Fasten the electrical connections, making sure that they are in the correct
position.

22. Install the protective panel in the trunk, then replace the spare tire (as
required) and the carpet.

23. Lower the vehicle.

24. Connect the negative battery cable.

25. Turn the ignition key ON and check for leaks.

To install:

Fig. 1: Remove the circlip on the fuel filer pipe to remove the pipe

Fig. 2: On rear drive models, the driveshaft must be removed

Fig. 3: Remove the tank-to-body attaching bolts

Fig. 4: Fuel tank assembly for a rear drive model

Fig. 5: Fuel tank assembly — 850/C70/S70 and V70 nonAWD models


## Fuel System Notes


1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Remove the throttle pulley cover (if equipped).

3. Remove the throttle body to air cleaner hose.

4. Remove the link between the throttle pulley and the throttle body (if
   equipped).

5. Remove the throttle cable from the throttle body.

6. Remove any necessary hoses.

7. Remove the connector from the Throttle Position (TP) sensor.

8. Remove the four throttle body-to-intake manifold retaining bolts.

9. Remove the throttle body from the intake manifold.

To install:

NOTE: If replacing the throttle body, install the TP sensor onto the new
throttle body before installing it onto the intake manifold.

10. Thoroughly clean the mounting surfaces of the intake manifold and the
    throttle body.

11. Install a new gasket onto the throttle body.

12. Install the throttle body onto the intake manifold.

13. Tighten the retaining bolts to 62 inch lbs. (7 Nm).

14. Install the TP sensor connector.

15. Install the throttle cable onto the throttle body.

16. Install the link between the throttle pulley and the throttle body (if
    equipped).

17. Install any hoses which were removed.

18. Install the throttle body-to-air cleaner hose.

19. Install the throttle pulley cover.

20. Connect the negative battery cable.

Fig. 1: Unfasten the TP sensor's electrical connector

Fig. 2: Disconnect the accelerator cable

Fig. 3: Unfasten the retaining bolts and remove the throttle body assembly

Fig. 4: Make sure you replace the throttle body gasket to prevent leaks


