# RESTRAINT SYSTEM


## Removing the Driver Side Air Bag Module

NOTE: In addition to a driver side air bag module, some models contain a
passenger side air bag module, located above the glove box.

Driver Side

WARNING Before working near the steering wheel, read the SRS service precautions
earlier in this section.

1. Place the front wheels in a straight-ahead position.

2. Disconnect the negative battery cable AND TAPE the cable end away from the
   battery.

3. Turn the ignition key to position I so that the steering lock is OFF.

4. On some models, remove the sound insulation knee guard and the side panel
   from the center console.

5. Turn the steering wheel slightly in order to reach the 2 TorxÂ® bolts in back
   of the steering wheel.

6. Remove the two attaching bolts.

7. Disconnect the connector and remove the air bag module.

CAUTION Be sure to carry the air bag module with the pad facing away from you,
and place it on a workbench or other flat surface with the pad facing upward.
This will reduce the chance of injury in the event of accidental deployment.

NOTE: Do not turn the ignition switch ON while the air bag assembly is removed,
as this will register a fault code.

To install:

8. Rest the bottom of the air bag assembly on the steering wheel and reattach
   the connector.

9. Place the air bag module in position, being careful not to get the leads
   caught.

10. Install and tighten the retaining bolts to 53 inch lbs. (6 Nm).

11. Install the knee guard (if removed).

NOTE: When tightening the air bag assembly retaining bolts, tighten the right
side bolt first.

CAUTION When connecting the battery, make sure that no one is in the vehicle, in
case of an SRS malfunction causing accidental air bag deployment.

12. Connect the negative battery cable.

13. Turn the ignition on and check the SRS system for codes.

Fig. 1: Remove the driver side air bag module's retaining bolts . . .

Fig. 2: . . . and carefully pull the module from the steering wheel

Fig. 3: Unplug the connector from the air bag and remove the module from the
car. Handle and store the module safely, as described

Passenger Side The passenger side air bag is removed when the instrument panel
cover is removed. See the Instrument Cluster Removal and Installation procedure,
later in this section, for removal of the cover. After the cover is removed, the
air bag module is simply unbolted from the cover. To install, tighten the module
retaining bolts and install the cover back onto the instrument panel.


## Restraint System Removal and Installation Procedure

WARNING Before working near the steering wheel, read the SRS service precautions
earlier in this section.

1. Place the front wheels in a straight-ahead position.

2. Disconnect the negative battery cable AND TAPE the cable end away from the
   battery.

3. Remove the air bag assembly.

4. Unfasten the retaining bolt and remove the steering wheel. On some models, it
   may be necessary to use a puller; if so, follow the tool manufacturer's
   instructions.

5. Detach the connector and remove the contact reel.

6. Set the contact reel to the zero position. If the contact reel must be
   "zeroed," turn the reel to the far right end and then back 3 revolutions to
   the left. Lock the contact reel with the screw in the plastic strip.

7. Install the steering wheel.

8. Install the air bag assembly.

NOTE: Do not turn the ignition switch ON while the air bag assembly is removed,
as this will register a fault code.

To install:

CAUTION When connecting the battery, make sure that no one is in the vehicle, in
case of an SRS malfunction causing accidental air bag deployment.

9.

10. Reconnect the negative battery cable.  Check the vehicle operation and SRS
    system for fault codes.


## "Supplemental Restraint System (SRS) Overview and Functionality"

The air bag system used on Volvo vehicles is referred to as Supplemental
Restraint System (SRS). The SRS system provides additional protection for the
driver, if a forward collision of sufficient force is encountered. The SRS
assists the normal seat belt restraining system by deploying an air bag, via the
steering wheel and, on some models, the passenger side of the dashboard.

The system also includes a knee bolster at the lower steering column area. It is
used to absorb energy and control the driver's forward movement during an
accident by limiting leg movement.

The system also includes a battery voltage check. The SRS warning lamp will
illuminate, if the voltage falls below 9 volts. When the voltage rises above 9
volts again, the lamp will be go out after approximately 10 seconds.

The SRS system is monitored continuously by a microprocessor in the crash
sensor. Any fault which is detected is stored in the memory and the SRS warning
lamp will turn ON.

Some later Volvo models are equipped with a Side Impact Protection System
(SIPS). Vehicles equipped with SIPS will contain a decal possibly located on the
front windshield, driver's side of the instrument panel, below the seat pocket,
or on the driver's side B-pillar.

The object of the SIPS system is to protect the occupants in the event of
certain side-impact accidents. An air bag is deployed to cushion the impact
against the outer side of the vehicle.

This system uses sensor mounted in the seat bottom, just outside the seat track.
If an accident occurs, the bag could deploy, triggered based upon information
gathered by the crash sensor measuring the violence of the collision. This
sophisticated process occurs in milliseconds.

The SIPS system is not part of the SRS system and has it's own function, in fact
unlike the SRS system, the SIPS system can deploy one side without deploying the
other, depending on which side the impact occurs.

Fig. 1: This label is a reminder of the presence of a Supplemental Restraint
System (SRS); be sure to heed the information

Fig. 2: This label is a notification of the presence of a Side Impact Protection
System (SIPS); again, note the service requirements


## Arming and Disarming the Restraint System

Assuming that the system components (air bag control module, sensors, air bag,
etc.) are installed correctly and are in good working order, the system is armed
whenever the battery's positive and negative battery cables are connected.

WARNING If you have disarmed the air bag system for any reason, and are
re-arming the system, make sure no one is in the vehicle (as an added safety
measure), then connect the negative battery cable.


## "Proper Shutdown and Battery Disconnection"

1. Turn the ignition switch to the OFF position.

2. Disconnect the negative battery cable AND TAPE the cable end away from the
   battery.


## SRS System Safety Precautions and Repair Recommendations

NOTE: Since the Supplemental Restraint System (SRS) is such a complex and
critical safety system (which requires special precautions when repairs are
being made), Volvo recommends that all repairs to the SRS system be performed by
Volvo SRS-trained technicians.

CAUTION To avoid deployment when servicing the SRS system or components in the
immediate area, do not use electrical test equipment such as battery or AC
powered voltmeter, ohmmeter, etc. or any type of tester other than specified. Do
not use a non-powered probe tester. To avoid personal injury all precautions
must be strictly adhered to.

All work which includes removing or replacing the air bag assembly must be
carried out with the battery disconnected and with the ignition turned OFF for
the duration of work. This is to ensure that the air bag does not accidentally
inflate during service repairs and that no faults codes will register, requiring
subsequent cancellation.

When working around the instrument panel or steering column, take special care
to ensure that the SRS wiring are not pinched, chafed or penetrated by
bolts/screws, etc. This is most likely to happen when installing the sound
insulation, knee bolsters, ignition lock or steering column cover.

For air bag fault tracing purposes and/or to check the system, use multimeter
999 6525 and test resistor 998 86595 or their equivalents.

Do not disassemble or tamper with the air bag assembly.

Always store a removed air bag assembly with the pad surface upwards.

Never install used SRS parts from another vehicle.

Never replace the original steering wheel with any other design, since it will
make it impossible to properly install the air bag.

Always detach the yellow SRS connector when performing any diagnostic
troubleshooting or service procedure associated with the SRS system.

When repairs are made to the front suspension and steering, be aware that the
contact reel can only withstand being turned 3 turns in either direction.

Never install an air bag assembly that shows signs of being dropped or
improperly handled, such as dents, cracks or deformation.

When replacing a sensor, the replacement unit should be installed with the
directional arrow oriented.

Do not energize the system until all components are connected. A failure code
may appear.

Always wear gloves and safety glasses when handling the air bag assembly. Wash
hands with mild soap and water afterwards.

Always store the air bag assembly on a secure flat surface, away from high heat
source and free of oil, grease, detergent or water.

Never disconnect any electrical connection with the ignition switch ON unless
instructed to do so in a test.

Before disconnecting the negative battery cable, make a record of the contents
memorized by each memory system (audio, seats, etc.). Then when service or
repairs are completed, make certain to reset these memory systems.


## Crash Scenario

Under normal conditions, the SRS warning lamp will come ON when the ignition
switch is turned to the ON position. If the engine is not started, the lamp will
be extinguished after approximately 10 seconds. Failure of the warning lamp to
go OFF, while driving, indicates a fault in the SRS system. The warning lamp
will remain lit until the fault is corrected and the memory cleared.

The crash sensor records a combination of G-force and prolong deceleration. When
a sufficiently high G-force and prolong deceleration are simultaneously
recorded, the power unit will deliver a current which will trigger the gas
generator of the inflatable bag. The bag will be filled in a few hundredths of a
second with non-toxic nitrogen. Immediately after the collision, the gas is
released through a ventilation hole and the air bag slowly collapses. The entire
sequence of inflation and collapse takes approximately 0.2 milliseconds.

The SIPS system works very similar to the SRS, however the SIPS is completely
mechanical. Only three components per side of the vehicle are used. The crash
sensor operates very similar to the SRS and activates when an impact of the
deformed door hits the sensor at a speed greater than 2 milliseconds or 6.6 ft.
per second. No electricity is used, the crash sensor deploys an igniter that
uses a charge very similar to the way a shotgun is fired to fill the bag.

The SIPS bag deploys and breaks through the seat cushion SIPS module cover. A
stitch seam in the seat is strategically placed to aid in this process. The bag
deploys toward the door to help protect the driver/passenger's rib cage during a
side-impact collision. There is a vent on the underside of the bag which will
allow the bag to deflate slowly, acting as a brake on the driver/passenger.

