# SENDING UNITS


## Engine Coolant Temperature (ECT) Sensor/Unit

The Engine Coolant Temperature (ECT) sensor is used as the sending unit on
Volvos. Please refer to Section 4 of this manual for information.

Fig. 1: Location of the ECT sensor/temperature sending unit


## "Replacing the Thermal Switch on the Radiator"

The thermal switch is located on the top of the radiator, usually on the
passenger side.

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Drain and recycle the engine coolant.

CAUTION Never open, service or drain the radiator or cooling system when hot;
serious burns can occur from the steam and hot coolant. Also, when draining
engine coolant, keep in mind that cats and dogs are attracted to ethylene glycol
antifreeze and could drink any that is left in an uncovered container or in
puddles on the ground. This will prove fatal in sufficient quantities. Always
drain coolant into a sealable container. Coolant should be reused unless it is
contaminated or is several years old.

3. Unplug the electrical connector from the switch.

4. Using a suitable size socket or wrench, loosen the switch.

5. Remove the switch by hand.

6. Install the switch into the radiator, and start the threads by hand.

7. Tighten the switch into the radiator, but take care not to overtighten or you
   will break the switch or radiator.

8. Plug the electrical connector in.

9. Connect the negative battery cable.

To install:

10. Refill the coolant and start the engine.

11. Let the vehicle warm up and check the operation of the fan switch.

12. Check the level of the coolant.

CAUTION Never open, service or drain the radiator or cooling system when hot;
serious burns can occur from the steam and hot coolant.

Fig. 1: The cooling fan switch is located at the upper corner of the radiator


## Testing the Electric Fan Switch

The electric fan switch, or thermal switch, can be checked by placing the
element in a bucket of water using an ohmmeter. Heat the water to approximately
207°–216°F (97°–102°C) and connect the switch leads to an ohmmeter. The switch
should have no continuity until the temperature reaches this level. Let the
water cool off below 207°F (97°C) and the switch should lose continuity. If the
switch has no continuity at any temperature, replace it.


## Sending Unit Removal and Installation Procedure for 1993 Volvo 940

On the Coupe, 240, 700 Series, and 940 models, the sending unit is attached to
the fuel pump. See Section 5 for service information.

On the 850/C70/S70/V70 and 960/S90/V90 models, the sending unit has an access
panel located in the trunk/hatch area. The procedure is as follows:

1. Relieve the fuel system pressure.

2. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

3. Tilt the rear seat forward and remove or fold back the trunk compartment
   carpet over the right-hand wheelwell panel. Remove any access panels or
   covers as necessary.

4. Disconnect the sending unit electrical wiring.

5. Remove the sending unit's plastic retaining nut using a socket wrench and
   tool 999-5486 or equivalent.

6. Lift the sending unit out carefully and remove the rubber seal.

WARNING Install the retaining nut while the sending unit is removed, otherwise
the tank connection may swell and the nut will be difficult to install.

To install:

7. Install a new dry seal, making sure that it is seated properly. Lubricate the
   top and outer side of the seal with petroleum jelly.

8. Install the sending unit with the wiring harness facing towards the passenger
   side of the vehicle.

9. Remove the retaining nut from the tank and install the retaining nut on the
   sending unit. Tighten it to 30 ft. lbs. (40 Nm) using tool 999-5486 or
   equivalent.

10. Connect the wiring, then install the panels, covers and carpet.

11. Connect the negative battery cable.

12. Run the engine and check for leaks.

Fig. 1: Remove the trunk/hatch trim

Fig. 2: Fuel level sending unit location — do not confuse it with the fuel pump

Fig. 3: Unfasten the fuel level sending unit's connector

Fig. 4: Using a socket wrench and tool 999-5486 or equivalent, remove the
retaining ring and lift the sending unit out of the tank


## Testing the Fuel Level Sender for a 1993 Volvo 940

The easiest way to test the fuel level sender is to use an assistant and remove
the sending unit from the fuel tank. Turn the ignition ON, but leave the engine
OFF. While your assistant watches the fuel gauge, slowly move the sending unit
arm upward and have your assistant check if the fuel gauge responds accordingly.
If the gauge does not move, check the circuit to the gauge, and check the gauge;
if both are OK, replace the sending unit.


## Replacing the Oil Pressure Sensor

1. Raise and safely support the vehicle.

2. Unplug the connector from the sensor.

3. Unfasten the sensor mounting bolts and remove the sensor from the oil pan.

4. Install the sensor into the oil pan.

5. Tighten the sensor mounting bolts.

6. Plug in the sensor connector.

7. Lower the vehicle.

To install:

Fig. 1: The oil pressure sensor is mounted to the side of the oil pan — 850
model shown

Fig. 2: Unplug the connector from the oil pressure sensor

Fig. 3: Unfasten the retaining bolts and remove the sensor


## Troubleshooting Procedure for Sending Unit Light

1. Unplug sensor connector and insert a jumper wire between terminals 1 and 2.

2. Start the vehicle.

3. If the light is on, check the harness and dashboard light.

4. If the light is off, replace the sensor and recheck the light operation.

Fig. 1: Connect a jumper wire between terminals 1 and 2


## NOTES?

NOTE: This section describes the operating principles of sending units, warning
lights and gauges. Sensors which provide information to the Electronic Control
Module (ECM) are covered in Section 4 of this manual.

Instrument panels contain a number of indicating devices (gauges and warning
lights). These devices are composed of two separate components. One is the
sending unit, mounted on the engine or other remote part of the vehicle, and the
other is the actual gauge or light in the instrument panel.

Several types of sending units exist, however most can be characterized as being
either a pressure type or a resistance type. Pressure type sending units convert
liquid pressure into an electrical signal which is sent to the gauge. Resistance
type sending units are most often used to measure temperature and use variable
resistance to control the current flow back to the indicating device. Both types
of sending units are connected in series by a wire to the battery (through the
ignition switch). When the ignition is turned ON, current flows from the battery
through the indicating device and on to the sending unit.
