# STEERING SYSTEM


## Ignition Lock Cylinder/Switch Assembly and Function

The ignition lock cylinder/switch is an integral unit. The lock cylinder turns
inside the switch assembly, and makes contact with terminals inside the switch,
determining which circuit to energize. Replacement of the separate components is
not possible; they are replaced as an assembly.


## Steering System Disassembly Procedure

### 240 Series

The ignition lock cylinder is mounted on the steering column and incorporates a
steering wheel lock to deter vehicle theft Removal of the lock assembly requires
the removal of the steering column assembly.

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable AND TAPE the cable end.

2. Remove the air bag assembly.

3. Remove the steering wheel.

4. Remove the contact reel.

5. Pull up the cover from the lower steering shaft joint, if required.

6. Loosen the upper bolts in the upper and lower joints.

7. Pull down the lower steering shaft so that the upper joint is freed from the
   upper steering shaft

8. Remove the upper and lower steering column covers.

9. Disconnect the connector for the wiper control.

10. Remove the retaining bolts for the wiper and indicator controls holder.

11. Lift the holder over the steering shaft and remove. Note the position of the
    indicator switch lead and remove.

12. Remove the connector from the starter switch, if required.

13. Remove the steering column's lower retaining bracket, seal in the firewall
    and defroster hose from the heater unit.

14. Tap the shearing bolts so that the bolts and plastic washers slide out of
    their slots in member.

15. Carefully remove the steering column with steering lock. Avoid getting the
    steering column caught while passing through the firewall.

16. Mount the steering column in a vise.

17. Break off the washers from the rear end edge of the shearing bolts, then
    using a pair of channel locks, remove the shearing bolts.

18. Press the ignition lock assembly from the steering column, using a suitable
    drift and counterhold tool (5295 or equivalent).

19. Install the key in the lock and turn.

20. Install the key in the lock and turn.

21. Press the new ignition lock assembly onto the steering column, using a
    suitable drift and counterhold tool (5295 or equivalent). The lock assembly,
    when installed, should be positioned as follows: Measure the distance from
    the top of the lock assembly to the end of the steering column, above
    splined area. The distance should be 5.98 inches (152mm).

To install:

22. Remove the key form the lock.

23. Turn the steering shaft and check that the lock barrel locks it.

24. Before installing the steering column, check that the upper steering shaft's
    collapsible coupling is intact. Its upper end (A) should not be able to move
    axially in relation to its lower end (B). Also, check the total length; it
    should be 27.38–28.18 inches (69.5–71.5cm). If the measurement is incorrect,
    replace the complete steering column.

25. Install the plastic guides in the column support. Turn the guides so that
    the washers faces downwards.

26. Install the steering column into position, but do not tighten the shearing
    bolts completely.

27. Pull the steering column towards the rear as far as possible; tighten the
    bolts further, but do not shear them yet.

28. Install the rubber grommets.

29. Install the lower retaining bracket and tighten the bolts lightly.

30. Coat the firewall rubber seals with petroleum jelly.

31. Install the seal on the steering column (cone turned inward) from the engine
    compartment side.

32. Tighten the upper bolts, but do not shear them yet.

33. Tighten the lower retaining bolts to 11–17 ft. lbs. (15–25 Nm).

34. Attach the defroster hose and reconnect the ignition lock connector.

35. Attach the universal joint to the upper steering column shafts. First
    tighten the upper bolt, then the lower.

36. Install the locking pins.

37. Checking and adjusting steering shaft:

    A.  When checking, the distance (A) between the upper steering shaft joint
    and shoulder on the lower steering shaft should be 0.39–0.75 inch (10–19mm).


    B.  If incorrect, loosen the upper bolted at (B) the lower joint. Loosen the
    lower bolt (C) of the upper shaft universal joint. Adjust the distance (A),
    by moving the shaft up or down. Tighten the bolts (B and C) to 14–20 ft.
    lbs. (18–28 Nm).  NOTE: Make sure the position of the upper steering shaft
    does not change, as this can affect the distance between the steering wheel
    and the steering column cover.

38. Install the holder for the combination switch control and connect the leads.

39. Connect the ground lead to one of the retaining bolts.

40. Install the upper and lower steering column covers.

41. Set contact reel to zero position: If contact reel must be zero, turn the
    reel to the far right end and then back 3 revolution to the left. Lock the
    contact reel with the screw in the plastic strip.

42. Ensure the front wheels are perfectly in straight-ahead position.

43. Install the contact reel bracket and contact reel.

44. Reconnect and properly position the lead.  WARNING Do not turn the steering,
    as this will cause the pin to snap, requiring replacement of the contact
    reel.

45. Install the steering wheel. Set the steering wheel so that the contact reel
    pin is in the center of the steering wheel hole.

46. Install the steering wheel nut finger-tight.

47. Remove the screw in the contact reel plastic strip and install in its
    parking hole in steering wheel.

48. Tighten the steering wheel nut to 42 ft. lbs. (60 Nm).  CAUTION When
    connecting the battery, make sure that no one is in the vehicle in case of
    an SRS malfunction causing accidental air bag deployment.

49. Connect the negative battery cable.

50. Check the SRS lamp operation and that no fault codes have been registered.

### Except 240 Series

WARNING Before working the steering system, read the SRS service precautions in
Section 6.

1. Place the front wheels in straight-ahead position.

2. Disconnect the negative battery cable AND TAPE the cable end.

3. Remove the air bag assembly.

4. Remove the steering wheel.

5. Remove the contact reel assembly.

6. Remove the combination switch.

7. Remove the steering column rake adjustment lever using a 0.12 in. (3mm) hex
   wrench.

8. Remove the parking plate around the steering tube (4 screws).

9. Disconnect the ignition lock connector.

10. Turn the ignition switch to position I.

11. Take a 0.079 inch (2mm) drift and press down the tumblers in the cylinder.

12. Remove the lock assembly.

13. Install the steering lock assembly.

14. Turn the ignition switch to position I and press down the tumblers with a
    suitable drift

15. Install the lock assembly.

16. Install the combination switch assembly.

17. Install the contact reel.

18. Install the steering wheel.

19. Install the air bag assembly.

To install:

CAUTION When connecting the battery, make sure that no one is in the vehicle in
case of an SRS malfunction causing accidental air bag deployment.

20. Reconnect the negative battery cable.

21. Check the vehicle operation and SRS system for fault codes.

Fig. 1: Removing the upper and lower steering column covers

Fig. 2: Ignition lock cylinder and switch removal


## "Steering System Procedure for Manual Rack and Pinion Assembly (240 Series)"

This procedure applies only to 240 series vehicles with manual rack and pinion
assemblies. All other models of the 240 series, as well as all other vehicles
covered by this manual, have a power rack and pinion; for those vehicles, refer
to the procedure later in this section.


## Steering System Removal and Installation Steps

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Remove the lockbolt and nut from the column flange.

3. Bend apart the flange slightly with a screwdriver.

4. Raise and support the vehicle safely.

5. Remove the front wheels.

6. Disconnect the tie rod ends, using a ball joint puller.

7. Remove the splash guard.

8. Disconnect the steering gear from the front axle member (beam).

9. Disconnect the steering gear at the steering shaft flange.

10. Remove the steering gear. Save the dowel pins.

11. Install rubber spacers and plates for the steering gear attachment points.

To install:

12. Position the steering gear and guide the pinion shaft into the steering
    shaft The recess on the pinion shaft should be aligned towards the lockbolt
    opening in the shaft

13. Attach the steering gear to the front axle member.

14. Check that the U-bolts are aligned in the plate slots. Install flat washers
    and nuts. Tighten the nuts to 10–18 ft. lbs. (14–25 Nm).

15. Install the splash guard.

16. Connect the steering rods to the steering arms. Tighten the nuts to 44 ft.
    lbs. (60 Nm).

17. Install the front wheels.

18. Lower the vehicle.

19. Install the lockbolt for the steering shaft flange. Tighten the bolt to 18
    ft. lbs. (25 Nm).

20. Have the alignment checked and reset if needed.

21. Connect the negative battery cable.


## Steering System Maintenance and Disassembly

### 240 Series and Coupe

CAUTION On vehicles with air bags, the front wheels must be pointing straight
ahead with the steering wheel locked. If this is not done, the contact reel of
the air bag system will reach its end position and deploy the air bag.

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable. Disarm the air bag system, if
   equipped.

2. Raise and support the vehicle safely on jackstands.

3. Remove the front wheels

4. From under the vehicle, remove the splashguard.

5. With the wheels pointed straight ahead, measure the length from one tie rod
   end to the steering rack housing.

6. Remove the steering column U-joint by scribing an alignment mark on the
   shaft.

7. Remove the cotter pin and loosen the nut and bolt securing the joint to the
   column shaft.

8. Separate the joint and steering shaft.

9. Remove the tie rod ends.

10. With a drip pan placed below the hoses to the steering rack, tag then remove
    the hoses. Discard the copper sealing washers.

11. Remove the sway bar if equipped.

12. Remove the two steering rack fixing bolts and nuts.

13. Lower the steering rack down from the vehicle frame and out.

14. Position the steering rack in the vehicle and secure the rack with the
    fixing nuts and bolts. Tighten the nuts and bolts to 32 ft. lbs. (44 Nm).

15. Install the sway bar if removed.

16. Install the hoses to the rack using new sealing washers. Tighten the hose
    bolts to 30 ft. lbs. (42 Nm).

17. Install the tie rod ends.

18. Connect the steering shaft and U-joint by aligning the scribe mark on the
    steering shaft with the mark on the U-joint. Tighten the retainer nut and
    bolt to 15 ft. lbs. (20 Nm). Install a new cotter pin.

19. Install the splashguard.

20. Fill the steering reservoir and bleed the system.

21. Lower the vehicle.

To install:

700 Series, 900 Series and S90/V90

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Raise and support the vehicle safely.

3. Remove the splash guard and the small jacking panel on the front crossmember.

4. Disconnect the lower steering shaft from the steering gear.

5. At the lower universal joint, remove the snaprings and loosen the upper clamp
   bolt.

6. Remove the lower clamp bolt and slide the joint up on the shaft

7. Use a ball joint separator and disconnect the tie rods at the outer ends.

8. Disconnect the fluid lines from the steering gear. Catch the spilled fluid in
   a pan and install plugs in the lines.

9. Remove the sway bar mounting brackets from the side members and move them out
   of the way.

10. Remove the steering gear retaining bolts and lower the assembly out of the
    vehicle.

11. When reinstalling, position the rack in position and install the retaining
    bolts. Tighten them to 32 ft. lbs. (44 Nm).

To install:

12. Install the sway bar mounting brackets.

13. Use new copper washers and connect the fluid lines to the assembly.

14. Connect the tie rods and tighten their nuts to 44 ft. lbs. (60 Nm).

15. Slide the lower universal joint down the shaft and into position.

16. Tighten the lower clamp bolt first, then the upper. Both bolts are tightened
    to 15 ft. lbs. (20 Nm).

17. Install the snaprings.

18. Reinstall the jacking plate and the splash guard.

19. Fill the reservoir with the appropriate type of Automatic Transmission Fluid
    (ATF). For further information, refer to Section 1.

20. Start the engine and smoothly turn the steering wheel from lock to lock 3 or
    4 times.

21. Bleed the system and recheck the fluid level in the reservoir.

22. Lower the vehicle.

Fig. 1: Unfasten the two attaching nuts/bolts to remove the lower shaft from the
steering gear

### 850, C70, S70 and V70 Series

CAUTION On vehicles with air bags, the front wheels must be pointing straight
ahead with the steering wheel locked. If this is not done, the contact reel of
the air bag system will reach its end position and deploy the air bag.

NOTE: The front subframe must be lowered. The bolts cannot be used again once
loosened: new subframe bolts are required.

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable. Disarm the air bag system, if
   equipped.

2. Install support rail 5033, bracket 5006 and lifting hook, or their
   equivalents, over the engine.

3. Lift the engine up slightly so that there is no pressure on the engine
   mounts.

4. Raise and safely support the vehicle.

5. Remove the front wheels.

6. Disconnect the tie rod ends.

7. Remove the splash guard from below the engine.

8. Disconnect the power steering fluid lines brackets and clamps from the front
   and rear of the subframe.

9. Remove the five nuts holding the steering rack to the subframe.

10. Position a jack below the rear part of the subframe and remove the
    following:

- 4 bolts holding the subframe to the body on both sides
- 2 bolts and washers holding the bracket to the subframe

11. Loosen the front subframe bolts so the frame lowers 0.59–0.79 in. (15–20mm).

12. Lower the subframe using the jack, and place a spacer between the frame and
the body at the rear edge so the frame will not pop up.

13. Position a catch pan under the steering rack and disconnect the power
steering lines from the rack.

14. Remove the steering column joint bolt and press it up from the steering
rack.

15. Remove the bolt holding the rack to the engine mount.

16. Remove rack from the right side.

17. Transfer the thermal protection plate and center attachment mount, but do
not tighten the mounting bolts.

18. Install the protective plugs in the line connection holes.

19. Install the tie rod ends.

20. Install the steering rack from the right side and let it rest on the rear
engine mount.

21. Raise the rack up on the right side so that it is straight in relation to
the frame and tighten the engine mount bolt to 37 ft. lbs. (50 Nm).

22. Connect the fluid lines and brackets loosely using new O-rings on the lines.

23. Align the fluid lines in the bracket and tighten them in the steering rack.

24. Fit the steering rack onto the steering shaft joint and tighten the bolt to
15 ft. lbs. (20 Nm).

25. Install the bolt lock clip.

26. Lift the rear of the subframe up using a jack and line up the steering rack
mount bolts in the frame.

27. Install new subframe bolts loosely.

28. Move the jack to the front and replace the bolts with new ones, but do not
tighten.

29. Tighten the bolts on the left side of the subframe to 77 ft. lbs. (105 Nm)
plus an additional 120 degrees.

30. Tighten the right side bolts the same way.

31. Finally, tighten the bracket bolts on both sides to 37 ft. lbs. (50 Nm).

32. Install new nuts on the steering rack and tighten them to 37 ft. lbs. (50
Nm).

33. Tighten the steering rack center bolt to 59 ft. lbs. (80 Nm).

34. Install the front and rear steering fluid line brackets and tighten them.

35. Install the engine splashguard below the engine.

36. Install the wheels.

37. Fill the power steering fluid reservoir with fluid.

38. Connect the negative battery cable.

39. Start the vehicle and bleed the steering system.

40. Check the fluid level once again.

41. Lower the vehicle and check the toe-in.

To install:


## Steering System Fluid Filling and Bleeding Procedure

1. Fill the reservoir with the proper type of fluid.

2. Raise and support the vehicle safely.

3. Place the transmission in N and apply the parking brake.

4. Start the engine and fill the reservoir as the level drops.

5. When the reservoir level has stopped dropping, slowly turn the steering wheel
from lock to lock several times. Fill the reservoir if necessary.

6. Continue to turn the steering wheel slowly until the fluid in the reservoir
is free of air bubbles.

7. Stop the engine and observe the oil level in the reservoir. If the oil level
rises more than 1 ⁄ 4 in. (6mm) past the level mark, air still remains in the
system. Continue bleeding until the level rise is correct.

8. Lower the vehicle.


## Power Steering Pump Removal and Installation

### 240 Series, 700 Series and Coupe

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Remove all dirt and grease from around the line connections at the pump.

3. Using a container to catch any fluid that might run out, disconnect the power
steering lines and plug them to prevent dirt from entering the system.

4. Remove the tensioner locking screws on both sides of the pump and remove the
drive belt.

5. Turn the pump up and remove the three bolts holding the bracket to the engine
block.

6. Remove the pump and bracket.

7. If the pump is being replaced with a new one, remove the nut and pulley from
the old pump and transfer it to the new one. Separate the bracket and tensioner
from the pump and install them loosely on the new pump.

8. Place the pump in position on the engine and install the retaining bolts and
spacer. tighten the bolts to 18 ft. lbs. (25 Nm).

9. Install the drive belt.

To install:

10. Adjust the belt tension and then tighten the nuts of the long bolts.

11. Use new copper washers, and reconnect the fluid lines to the pump.

12. Fill the reservoir with Type A or Dexron® III automatic transmission fluid
and bleed the system.

13. Connect the negative battery cable.

### 940, 960, S90 and V90 Series

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Loosen the belt tensioner.

3. Remove the mounting bracket and bolt.

4. Disconnect the lines at or near the pump. Depending on the type of pump, it
may be necessary to disconnect the rubber hoses from the metal pipes instead of
removing the lines at the pump body. Use a catch pan under the vehicle for
spillage. Plug the lines and fittings immediately to avoid contamination.

5. Remove the large retaining bolt and remove the drive belt from the pump.

6. Lower the pump slightly and disconnect the filler hose from the pump.

7. Remove the pump from the vehicle.

8. If the pump is to be replaced with a new one, transfer the pulley, the
mounting bracket and the washers to the new pump.

9. Install the mounting bracket on the new pump; make sure the thick washer is
between the bracket and the pump body.

To install:

10. Install the pulley with the conical face of the washer must be to the
outside.

11. Connect the filler hose to the pump.

12. Position the pump and install the retaining bolts loosely.

13. Install the mounting bracket and belt.

14. Adjust the belt tension.

15. Tighten the lower retaining bolts to 18 ft. lbs. (25 Nm).

16. Connect the fluid hoses to the pump. Use new copper washers and/or hose
clamps. Tighten the banjo fittings to 31 ft. lbs. (40 Nm).

17. Connect the negative battery cable.

18. Fill the fluid reservoir and start the engine.

19. Bleed the steering system.

### 850, C70, S70 and V70 Series

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Remove the radiator reservoir cap.

3. Open the radiator draincock on the left side under the radiator and drain out
about 3.2 qts. (3 liters) of coolant.

4. Disconnect the radiator hose from the thermostat housing.

5. Remove the oil hose holder from the dipstick tube and the air cooler hose
from the control module box.

6. Using the proper sized ratchet, release the tension from the drive belt
tensioner and remove the belt from the power steering pump.

7. Remove the long bolt and spacer from the plate.

8. Loosen the pressure side hose a quarter turn and the lower plate mount nut a
few turns.

9. Remove all of the pump mounting bolts.

10. Lift the pump straight up and disconnect the pressure hose and old O-ring.
Collect any fluid that spills.

11. Carefully make a small cut in the end of the return line no longer than the
mark on the hose itself.

12. Remove the pump.

13. Raise and safely support the vehicle.

14. Turn the steering wheel from lock to lock and collect the fluid from the
lines. Make sure no oil gets into the alternator.

15. Place the old pump in a vise and remove the pulley using an appropriate
puller.

16. Install the pulley on the new pump, using an appropriate pressing tool.
Apply a small amount of oil to the shaft to ease the installation.

17. Install the pump and five mounting bolts, tighten them to 18 ft. lbs. (25
Nm).

18. Install the long bolt and cover plate spacer, tighten it to 18 ft. lbs. (25
Nm).

19. Tighten the lower attachment to 18 ft. lbs. (25 Nm).

20. Install the following:

To install:

- pressure hose with a new O-ring
- return hose
- hose bracket for power steering hoses to dipstick tube

- radiator hose
- pump drive belt
- cooling hose to the control module box.

21. Connect the negative battery cable.

22. Fill the cooling system with coolant.

23. Fill the power steering pump reservoir with new fluid.

24. Bleed the steering system.


## Rear Washer/Wiper Controls and Switch Assembly

The tailgate washer/wiper controls are mounted on the same control stalk as the
front wipers. The components are not individually replaceable for the rear
system. To replace the switch assembly, follow the directions given for Turn
Signal/Windshield Wiper Switch.


## Precautions for SRS System and Steering Maintenance

Before beginning work which could affect the SRS system, always turn the
ignition OFF, disconnect the negative battery cable AND TAPE the end of the
cable.

When working around the instrument panel or steering column, take special care
to ensure that the SRS wiring are not pinched, chafed or penetrated by
bolts/screws, etc. This is most likely to happen when installing the sound
insulation, knee bolsters, ignition lock or steering column cover.

When repairs are made to the front suspension and steering, be aware that the
contact reel can only withstand being turned 3 turns in either direction.

Never service the steering shaft or steering gear without first locking the
contact reel and removing the steering wheel.

When fault tracing the SRS system with the air bag assembly in place, install
the special tool 998 8695 or equivalent. This tool has the same resistance as
the air bag assembly.  The use of this tool prevent accidental air bag inflation
and fault code registration during work.


## Steering System Overview and Safety Precautions

All 1990–98 Volvos are equipped with a servo operated steering system. The
steering gear is of the rack and pinion type. A vane-type servo pump is
belt-driven from the crankshaft. Wheel deflection is limited by a stop in the
steering gear and cannot be adjusted.

In addition, these vehicles are equipped with a Supplemental Restraint System
(SRS). The SRS system consists of an inflatable bag located in the center of the
steering wheel. The bag is normally folded up, but is instantly inflated in the
event of certain types of collision. The SRS provides extra safety, in addition
to the seat belts.

WARNING All work which includes removing or replacing the air bag assembly must
be carried out with the battery disconnected and with the ignition turned OFF
for the duration of work. This is to ensure that the air bag does not
accidentally inflate during service repairs and that no faults codes will
register, requiring subsequent cancellation.


## Steering Wheel Removal and Installation

WARNING Before working the steering system, read the SRS service precautions in
Section 6.

1. Drive the vehicle forward on a level surface so that the wheels are straight.

2. Disconnect the negative battery cable AND TAPE the cable end.

3. Turn the ignition key to position I so that the steering lock is OFF.

4. Remove the air bag assembly, as described in Section 6.

5. Remove the steering wheel mounting bolt.

6. Lock the contact reel: Release the locking screw in the end of the plastic
strip from its "parking hole" in the steering wheel. Screw must always remain in
plastic strip. Attach the locking screw to the contact reel pin. The contact
reel is now locked in the zero position.

WARNING Do not turn the steering wheel, as this will cause the pin to snap,
requiring replacement of the contact reel.  Remove the steering wheel, being
careful to pull the lead and plastic strip with the screw through the hole in
the middle.

To install:

7. Install the steering wheel.

8. Set the steering wheel so that the contact reel pin is in the center of the
steering wheel hole.

9. Install the steering wheel nut finger-tight.

10. Remove the screw in the contact reel plastic strip and install in its
parking hole in steering wheel.

11. Tighten the steering wheel nut to 42 ft. lbs. (60 Nm).

12. Install the air bag assembly.

CAUTION When connecting the battery, make sure that no one is in the vehicle in
case of an SRS malfunction causing accidental air bag deployment.

13. Connect the negative battery cable.

14. Check the vehicle operation and SRS system for fault codes.

Fig. 1: Remove the steering wheel mounting bolt

Fig. 2: Lock the contact reel down before removing the steering wheel

Fig. 3: View of the contact reel with the wheel removed


## NOTES?

CAUTION This procedure requires removal of the steering wheel. If the vehicle is
equipped with the SRS (air bag) system, refer to the safety precautions listed
earlier in this section. DO NOT remove the wheel until these precautions have
been followed.

1. Disconnect the negative battery cable.

2. Turn the steering wheel to the straight ahead position.

3. Remove the center pad from the wheel.

4. Remove the steering wheel retaining bolt. If possible, matchmark the wheel
and steering shaft. If the vehicle is equipped with SRS, pull out the locking
screw and the long tape label from its station in the steering wheel hub. Use
the lock screw (with the tape flag attached) to lock the contact reel through
the hole in the steering wheel hub. Do not turn the steering wheel once the bolt
is removed; the pin in the contact reel will shear.

5. Remove the steering wheel and the upper and lower steering column casings.

6. To remove the switch, simply remove the retaining screws holding it to the
column and unplug the connector.

To install:

NOTE: When reassembling, remember to check the position of all the wires so that
nothing is pinched in casings.

7. Install the switch in the column, attach the electrical connectors, and
tighten the retaining screws.

8. Reinstall the column casings.

9. Install the steering wheel. Check that the steering wheel position is true to
the position of the wheels. If the vehicle is SRS equipped, do not turn the
steering wheel until the center bolt is reinstalled and tight; doing so will
shear the pin in the contact reel. Remove the locking bolt with its flag and
store it in the extra hole on the left side of the wheel.

10. Tighten the steering wheel bolt to 42 ft. lbs. (60 Nm).

11. Reinstall the center pad.

12. Connect the negative battery cable.

13. Start the vehicle and check the SRS system for faults.

Fig. 1: Typical turn signal/windshield wiper switch assembly
